The position of an object in a reference frame is given by a position vector $\vec{r}$, in m.

It's a vector, that starts at the origin (0;0), and goes to the object's center of mass (x;y).

>[!question]- reminder
>A vector is composed of a direction, a sense, and a magnitude (length).
>It's direction is where it's pointing, it's sense whether it's pointing forwards or backwards, and it's magnitude is how long it is.
>More info in [[1. Vector|analytical geometry]]

$\vec{r}$ is pointing from the origin to the object, it's sense is looking from the origin to the object, and it's length is the distance from the origin to the object.

## Working with vectors

Now, working with vectors directly for most things is hard. So, we turn these vectors into scalars. To do so, we turn the vector into two simpler vectors, by projecting it onto $\vec{e_x}$ and $\vec{e_y}$. In other terms, we take the vector's horizontal and vertical component.

We will end up with something that resembles:
$\vec{r}=x\vec{e_x}+y\vec{e_y}$
which we simplify as 
$\begin{bmatrix}x\newline y\end{bmatrix}$

To find it, we simply use the following:
$\begin{bmatrix}r*cos(\alpha)\newline r*sin(\alpha)\end{bmatrix}$

Where $r=\sqrt{x^2+y^2}$, and alpha is the direction of the vector.

If you want "advanced" vector terms, by turning the polar notation into the column vector notation.

Basically, x and y are components of $\vec{r}$ in the chosen reference frame.

Also, x and y are measured in m.

## Time

> "a big ball of timey wimey stuff"
> Some doctor another

Our object has a property that we tend to forget sometimes: it can move.

What does that mean: well, depending on the time, it's position might be different.

Just a "simple" question: what is time?

Well, as we're doing Newtonian physics and not something more complex, time is merely a way to compare duration. It's symbol is t, and it's measured in s (seconds).

Because of this, the movement of an object is essentially the answer to two questions:

- Where is the object?
- When is the object?


To accommodate this need for time, we can also define $\vec{r}$ as a function, that takes in time, and spits out the position. 
Basically, $\vec{r}=\vec{r}(t)=\begin{bmatrix}x(t)\newline y(t)\end{bmatrix}$, it's position at moment t.

## So, what is movement?

Movement is a comparison between two positions ($\vec{r_1}$ and $\vec{r_2}$) of an object.

So, let's be more detailed.

$\vec{r_1}$ is, as we've defined, $\vec{r}(1)$. In other terms, it's the 'ancient' position of the object.
$\vec{r_2}$ is $\vec{r}(2)$, so the 'new' position of the object.

So, we need the comparison, the difference ($\Delta$) of the positions.

We can say that $\vec{r_1}+\Delta\vec{r}=\vec{r_2}$
If we rearrange that:

$$\vec{r_1}+\Delta\vec{r}=\vec{r_2}\Leftrightarrow\Delta\vec{r}=\vec{r_2}-\vec{r_1}$$

(for a more detailed explanation of the math involved, again [[1. Vector|analytical geometry]] has a more detailed explanation of all that.)

## Trajectory

The trajectory of an object is the set of all points that it passes through. It's noted $\Gamma$.

Using mathematical terms:

$$\Gamma=\{P\mid\exists t, \vec{r}(t)=P\}$$

(in text this means that $\Gamma$ is the set of all points, where there exists a time where the object's position is that point)

It's basically the answer to the question "Where?", that doesn't really care about "When?".

## Encounter

If there exists a time $t_r$, where 2 different objects encounter each other, we can talk about encounter.

To encounter each other, they must find themselves at the same position (in relation to the same reference frame, obviously), at the same time.

Basically,
$\exists t_r, \vec{r_{obj1}}(t_r)=\vec{r_{obj2}}(t_r)$

To do so, we typically do the projections onto the chosen reference vectors, and solve the resulting system of equations.

## Speed

So, we have a trajectory $\Gamma$.

On that trajectory, we have 2 points, $P_1$ and $P_2$.

As a reminder:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\Delta\vec{r}=\vec{r_2}-\vec{r_1}
\newline
\newline
\vec{r}=\vec{r}(t)
\newline
\vec{r_1}=\vec{r}(t_1)
\newline
\vec{r_2}=\vec{r}(t_2)
\end{aligned}
$$

### Average speed

Average speed is defined as follows:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\vec{v}_{avg}=\frac{\Delta\vec{r}}{\Delta t}
\end{aligned}
$$

This means that average speed is a part of the movement, that is done over a time. 

As it's distance over a time, it's unit is $\frac{m}{s}$

From this, we can also define the following:

$$
\vec{r_2}=\vec{r_1}+\vec{v}_{avg}*\Delta t
$$


Average speed, while useful, has it's limits as if I for example have a walk around a building, and am back where I started, it'd imply my speed is 0. If I want the speed I was walking at around the building, I need....
### Instant speed

Instant speed is the same as average speed, but for a very very small time interval.

As $P_2\rightarrow P_1$ (as $P_2$ approaches $P_1$), the speed vector becomes closer and closer to being the tangent of $\Gamma$ at point $P_1$. 

The movement $\Delta\vec{r}$, gives us the direction of the movement just after $t_1\approx t$, and 
$\frac{\Delta \vec{r}}{\Delta t}$ becomes the instant speed.

In other advanced math terms, instant speed is the derivative of the position.

## Specific movements

Some movements are easier to deal with than others. These are some of them.

### Immobile object

When the vector between the origin and the object is always the same, as in it's constant, the object is immobile.

In that case, we can say that the speed of the object is always 0. 
$\vec{v}(t)=\vec{0}$.



### Object at a constant speed

When all points of $\Gamma$ are aligned, and pass by a point A at instant $t_0$

$$
\begin{aligned}
\vec{r}(t_0)=\vec{r_0}=\vec{OA}
\end{aligned}
$$

The movement from a point A to a point P, is proportional to the time spent on it.

From that, we can define that:

$$\vec{r}(t)=\vec{r_0}+\vec{v_0}*(t-t_0)$$

As in the position of an object is defined as the initial position + the speed times the time. 

This only works because it's a straight movement across a straight line.

We call this uniform rectilinear movement (in french abbreviated as "MRU"). 

[[2. Reference, origin, fixed frame of reference|Previous]]
[[3.5. more instant speed things|Next]]
