Speed also varies, so we came up with acceleration that is to speed what speed is to position.

So, between two different times, we have a $\vec{v}_1=\vec{v}(t_1)$, and $\vec{v}_2=\vec{v}(t_2)$, and also a $\Delta\vec{v}=\vec{v}_2-\vec{v_1}$... starting to sound familiar?

> [!note]+
> If we were to plot this, $\Delta \vec{v}$ is directed towards the inside of the movement.

We still obviously have $\Delta t=2_1-t_1$

Average acceleration is, much like with speed, $\vec{a_{avg}}=\frac{\Delta\vec{v}}{\Delta t}=\frac{1}{\Delta t}\Delta\vec{v}$

Instant acceleration is, also much like speed:

As $\Delta t$ approaches 0, the acceleration is at instant t:

$$\vec{a}(t)=\lim_{\Delta t \to 0} \frac{\Delta \vec{v}}{\Delta t}=\lim_{\Delta t \to 0}\frac{\vec{v}(t+\Delta t)- \vec{v}(t)}{\Delta t}=\frac{d\vec{v}}{dt}=\dot{\vec{v}}=\ddot{\vec{r}}$$

In other terms, it's the derivative of speed, and the second derivative of the position.

It's unit is the $m/s^2$

Some properties:
- It's the variation of speed with regards to time
- It's a vector with all that entails
- always directed towards inside of where it's turning (if the trajectory is turning at all...)
- It's also a function of time $\vec{a}=\vec{a}(t)$ (acceleration at moment t)

I've been also told [this](https://moodle.epfl.ch/pluginfile.php/2313204/mod_resource/content/3/PosVitAcc.pdf) is a good animation to show all that.

## Some notices

The speed changes in the direction of $\vec{a}: \vec{a}//{\\vec{\Delta v}}$

The acceleration of an object indicates that on the tangent of the trajectory ($// \vec{v}$) indicates a change in the magnitude of the speed. On the normal of the trajectory, ($\perp\vec{v}$) it also indicates a change in speed.

This assumes that the speed and the acceleration aren't looking in the same direction. If they do, the speed will always be // to the acceleration.

[[3.5. more instant speed things|Previous]]
[[5. Some movement examples|Next]]
