We've already briefly looked at the rectilinear uniform movement (MRU), we'll look at it more, but we'll also add in circular uniform movement (MCU), as well as uniformly accelerated movement (MUA), and lastly rectilinear uniformly accelerated movement  (MRUA)


## Encounter in a circle (MCU)

Two objects of trajectory $\Gamma_1$ and $\Gamma_2$, where $\Gamma_1$'s movement is an MCU (basically, it's trajectory is a circle), while $\Gamma_2$'s trajectory is a straight line, intersecting the circle in two points.

We know some variables:

$R$ - the radius of the circle.
$d$ - the distance between the center of the circle and $\Gamma_2$
$\vec{v}_{1,0}$ - the initial speed of the object on the circle. 
$\vec{v}_{2,0}$ - the initial speed of the object on the straight line
$\vec{r}_1$ - the initial position of the circle object
$\vec{r}_2$ - the initial position of the line object. 

The Object 2 starts at distance d from the center of the circle. Object 2 starts on the circle.

So, from that we find the following:

$\vec{r}_1(t)=R\begin{bmatrix}cos(\alpha(t))\\ sin(\alpha(t)) \end{bmatrix}$
with $\alpha(t)=\cfrac{2\pi t}{T}$, where T is the time it takes for a full circle (=period)

$\vec{r}_2=\vec{d}-v_{2,0}(t-t_0)\vec{e_y}$

This means that 

$\vec{r}_1(t_r)=\vec{r}_2(t_r)$
$R\cos\alpha(t_r)=d$
$R\sin\alpha(t_r)=-v_{2,0}(t_r-t_0)$

## General example of uniformly accelerated movement.


We have an object, that passes by point A at instant $t_0$ ($\vec{r}(t_0)=\overrightarrow{OA}=\vec{r}_0$) , with speed $v_0$ ($\vec{v}(t_0)=\vec{v}_0$), with a constant acceleration $\vec{a}(t)=\vec{a}_0=\overrightarrow{const}$

That means that:

$\vec{a}(t)=\vec{a}_0=\overrightarrow{const}$
$\vec{v}(t)=\vec{v}_0+\vec{a}_0*(t-t_0$
$\vec{r}(t)=\vec{r}_0+\vec{v}_0(t-t_0)+\frac{1}{2}\vec{a}_0(t-t_0)^2$ <- This is the general formula.

We may also note that, geometrically speaking, this is the formula for a parabola.

You may wonder where the 1/2 comes from in the general formula. The answer has something to do with derivatives and integrals, which we've not done yet. We need the derivative of the general formula to be able to be the formula for speed, which here is the case.

## Example of $\vec{a}=\overrightarrow{const}$ - Ballistics

We have 3 things:
- initial position
- initial velocity

This isn't exactly enough, so we will now define some more stuff with

### MRUA - free fall (again)

Now, what is MRUA in this context?

MRUA is the case where the initial speed is 0, or is // to the acceleration $\vec{a}_0$

A good example is free fall, where the acceleration only happens because of gravity. 

Close to the surface to the earth, the force is considered constant and directed towards the bottom (aka the center of the earth), it's denoted g, and has a magnitude of 9.81. 

> [!Note]-
> It's worth noting that g is not constant, it is merely considered as such. g will slightly depend on some factors, notably where you are. If you want your scale to display a slightly lower number, go to the equator. It might not lower your mass, but it will lower your weight.
> 
> Don't do this it's a waste of money, and the number usually doesn't even change until like 4 decimals in. According to a quick google (well, Firefox) search, the difference is of roughly less than 1%.


Anyhow, to do math, you need numbers, and to have numbers that mean something, you need to define what they mean.

To do math, we need to project all these vectors we have, notably the acceleration due to gravity vector ($\vec{g}=\begin{bmatrix}0\\-9.81\end{bmatrix}=(9.81;270)$). 

This makes it so that the speed only changes along the y axis, and not the x axis, and because -9.81 < 0, it'll increase towards the floor.

This allows us to separate the fall into two parts:

along $\vec{e_x}$, it's MRU, as it's speed is constant ($\vec{a}_x=0$).

along $\vec{e_y}$, it's MRUA, as it's speed is always changing by a constant ($\vec{a}_y\ne0$).

This same process can be used on a lot of movements. 


## Summary

### glossary

$\Delta t$ - the difference in time, equivalent to $(t-t_0)$
trivial case - usually where many things cancel out / are trivially easy. Also used to refer to cases in 1D.


### MRU

This means $\vec{v}=const$; $\vec{a}=\vec{0}$.

$\vec{a}(t)=\vec{0}$
$\vec{v}(t)=\vec{v_0}$
$\vec{r}(t)=\vec{r_0}+\vec{v}(t-t_0)=\vec{r_0}+\vec{v} \cdot\Delta t$

### MRUA

this means $\vec{v}\ne const$; $\vec{a}=const$

$\vec{a}(t)=const$
$\vec{v}(t)=\vec{v_0}+\vec{a}\cdot\Delta t$
$\vec{r}(t)=\vec{r_0}+\vec{v}\cdot\Delta t + \frac{1}{2}\vec{a}(\Delta t)^2$

Can (and should unless it's a trivial case) be done individually on each axis. Also, if you plug in that $\vec{a}=0$, you get MRU. 

### MUA

yeah good luck

[[4. Acceleration|Previous]]
[[1. Newton's first law|Next chapter - dynamics]]
