We've already briefly looked at the rectilinear uniform movement (MRU), we'll look at it more, but we'll also add in circular uniform movement (MCU), as well as uniformly accelerated movement (MUA), and lastly rectilinear uniformly accelerated movement  (MRUA)


## Encounter in a circle (MCU)

Two objects of trajectory $\Gamma_1$ and $\Gamma_2$, where $\Gamma_1$'s movement is an MCU (basically, it's trajectory is a circle), while $\Gamma_2$'s trajectory is a straight line, intersecting the circle in two points.

We know some variables:

$R$ - the radius of the circle.
$d$ - the distance between the center of the circle and $\Gamma_2$
$\vec{v}_{1,0}$ - the initial speed of the object on the circle. 
$\vec{v}_{2,0}$ - the initial speed of the object on the straight line
$\vec{r}_1$ - the initial position of the circle object
$\vec{r}_2$ - the initial position of the line object. 

The Object 2 starts at distance d from the center of the circle. Object 2 starts on the circle.

So, from that we find the following:

$\vec{r}_1(t)=R\begin{bmatrix}cos(\alpha(t))\\ sin(\alpha(t)) \end{bmatrix}$
with $\alpha(t)=\cfrac{2\pi t}{T}$, where T is the time it takes for a full circle (=period)

$\vec{r}_2=\vec{d}-v_{2,0}(t-t_0)\vec{e_y}$

This means that 

$\vec{r}_1(t_r)=\vec{r}_2(t_r)$
$R\cos\alpha(t_r)=d$
$R\sin\alpha(t_r)=-v_{2,0}(t_r-t_0)$

## General example of uniformly accelerated movement.


We have an object, that passes by point A at instant $t_0$ ($\vec{r}(t_0)=\overrightarrow{OA}=\vec{r}_0$) , with speed $v_0$ ($\vec{v}(t_0)=\vec{v}_0$), with a constant acceleration $\vec{a}(t)=\vec{a}_0=\overrightarrow{const}$

That means that:

$\vec{a}(t)=\vec{a}_0=\overrightarrow{const}$
$\vec{v}(t)=\vec{v}_0+\vec{a}_0*(t-t_0$
$\vec{r}(t)=\vec{r}_0+\vec{v}_0(t-t_0)+\frac{1}{2}\vec{a}_0(t-t_0)^2$ <- This is the general formula.

We may also note that, geometrically speaking, this is the formula for a parabola.

You may wonder where the 1/2 comes from in the general formula. The answer has something to do with derivatives and integrals, which we've not done yet. We need the derivative of the general formula to be able to be the formula for speed, which here is the case.

## Example of $\vec{a}=\overrightarrow{const}$ Ballistics

We have 3 things:
- initial position
- initial velocity
- the fact this is happening on earth, making it so $\vec{g}=(9.81;270\degree)$

From that, we can find a whole lot of things we weren't exactly explained so I'm not noting them.

## MRUA - free fall (again)

Now, what is MRUA in this context?

MRUA is the case where the initial speed is 0, or is // to the acceleration $\vec{a}_0$



[[4. Acceleration|Previous]]