
## What's an algorithm?

An algorithm is a procedure to solve a problem. 
It takes a series of inputs and gives a series of outputs, in a deterministic way (that is to say, if you give the same input twice, both times it'll return the same thing).

In the various times we've written functions and what not in series, we've written implementations of algorithms.

Now, algorithms are interesting, but a bit too abstract, so we'll use python code the represent/implement them.

## Some vocabulary

The term instance when is a different example of the problem.
An algorithm solves every possible valid instance.
A valid instance is an instance that actually makes sense.

Take the example of min(), which needs to return the minimal value of a list of numbers.
That means `[1,2,3,4,5]` is a valid instance of the problem. `['a','b','c']` is not, as it isn't numbers.


## How do we choose an algorithm

When we use an algorithm, we need to have a reason to use it, and not another way to solve the same problem.

To choose which, we typically use how fast it takes to compute.

It's also worth noting that some problems don't have algorithms that solve them, and some other algorithms don't have efficient solutions.

## tldr

An algorithm is a general procedure to solve a problem.

A program is a specific implementation of that algorithm.

The same algorithm can have multiple implementations.

In this lesson, we'll solve them in python.

Basically, an algorithm is a layer between the code and the problem, that tells you what your code should do.

[[4. Classes|Previous chapter]]
[[2. Correctness of algorithms|Next]]