
Imagine a simple pendulum. 

When it swings, at some point in time, it's going downwards. There's a certain speed at which it's going.
Then, when it's at the lowest point, it's going the fastest, only to start going upwards, losing the speed, and starting to go down again, and repeat.

From there, we can decide on some value, measured in Joules, that describes how much the object can move. It's called energy.

In the pendulum example, we define 2 of them, which are the important ones in dynamics: kinetic energy, and potential energy.

If we look at the entire system, we'll notice that over time, if we assume it's ideal, both it's energies remain the same, however the sum of both, the mechanical energy, remains the same.

We thus get the next law of physics:
> Energy can never be created or destroyed, only transformed.

Note that in reality, everything's a bit more complex, and the pendulum would slow down and stop eventually. Not because the law doesn't work, however because energy gets transferred to the local air, to many other things, and everywhere. This system isn't perfect. 


Anyhow, n any given system, we can calculate a scalar value, that is called energy E. We can notice that if there is no exchange between the system's environment and the system itself, the system's energy is constant. 

- Isolated system: between two instants, $t_{1}$ and $t_{2}$ ($t_{1}\gt t_{2}$), the energy varition would be null. That is to say $\Delta E=E(t_{2})-E(t_{1})=0$
- Non isolated system: The variation of energy by exchange: $\Delta E=E(t_{2})-E(t_{1})\ne0$

It's worth noting in the second case, energy is still constant, just in an even larger system. 

By convention, we always look from the point of view of the system, that is to say, if $\Delta E\gt0$, the system is gaining energy, if $\Delta E \lt 0$, the system is losing energy. 


The most important thing to remember about energy, is that it exists in many forms.
There are only a couple that matter to us right now:

kinetic
potential of gravity
potential elastic
potential electric
electromagnetic
thermal
"deformation"
rotation

Some that don't (right now, good luck to the people that will go into chemistry):
chemical
nuclear

So, to repeat myself but this is really the important stuff to remember: the total energy in a system is constant, but it can change form. 
A very simple example is a pendulum, where energy changes form between kinetic and potential.

[[11. Another mathematical intermède|Previous chapter]]
[[2. Kinetic energy and work|Next]]