
## Kinetic energy

Let's consider an object of mass m, in movement, subject to some forces the resultant of which is $\vec{F}^{ext}$.

We know the evolution of the center of mass is described using $\vec{F}^{ext}=m\vec{a}_{cm}$

Let's try to project that equation along the trajectory $\Gamma$ of the object.
We can fairly simply use the scalar product, so let's project the force along the speed. 

That gives us:

$\vec{v}_{cm}\cdot\vec{F}^{ext}=\vec{v}_{cm}\cdot m\vec{a}_{cm}$

This gives us a decent starting point to discuss kinetic energy.

All descriptions normal to the speed (well, the trajectory) gets lost, that is to say this is a simplification of what actually happens, which means we won't get an as detailed answer/explanation of why something happens, but we can still easily talk about how it happens.

$$\begin{equation}\begin{split}
\vec{v}_{cm}\cdot\vec{F}^{ext}=\vec{v}_{cm}\cdot m\vec{a}_{cm}\\
\frac{m}{2} \frac{d}{dt}(v^{2}_{cm})=\vec{F}^{ext}\cdot\vec{v}_{cm}
\end{split}\end{equation}$$

How exactly this works would require derivatives, which we haven't done yet. 

If we assume mass doesn't change:

$$\frac{d}{dt}(\frac{m}{2}v^{2}_{cm})=\vec{F}^{ext}\cdot\vec{v}_{cm}$$

We'll circle back to this entire thing a bit later.

From inside the derivative, we can notice that $\frac{m}{2}v^{2}_{cm}$ is basically the same as $\frac{mv^{2}}{2}$, which is the formula for kinetic energy, which is measured in Joules \[J\], or newton-meters \[Nm\], and is the energy associated with the movement of the center of mass.

That's nice, but where do we get newon-meters from?
Well, let's come  back to our equation...

$$
\begin{equation}\begin{split}
\frac{d}{dt}(\frac{m}{2}v^{2}_{cm})=\vec{F}^{ext}\cdot\vec{v}_{cm}\\
\frac{d}{dt}E_{kin,cm}=\vec{F}^{ext}\cdot \frac{d}{dt}\vec{r}_{cm}\\
\end{split}\end{equation}$$

Which is to say the kinetic energy varies because of some **work** done by external forces.

We thus can write the variation of kinetic energy of the center of mass during an infinitely small interval of time dt as 

$$dE_{kin,cm}=\vec{F}^{ext}\cdot \vec{r}_{cm}$$

Where $d\vec{r}_{cm}$ is the movement of the center of mass during $dt$. 

We therefore define infinitesimal work to be $dW=\vec{F}^{ext}\cdot d\vec{r}_{cm}$

The total work for something to travel between some point 1 and point 2, that is to say the total work exerted, so we need a sum of infinitesimal work done over the period of time it took to travel from p1 to p2. We right now would assume we need to use sums ($\sum$), however for various reasons (mostly because we're working with infinitesimals), we'd need to use integrals ($\int$).

$$W^{ext}_{1\to2}=\int_{1}^{2}\vec{F}^{ext}\cdot d\vec{r}_{cm}$$
Lastly, we get the most important formula of this part: $E_{kin,cm}(2)-E_{kin,cm}(1)=W^{ext}_{1\to2}$, which is[^1] the theorem of kinetic energy.


## Example

We have a mass, going down a slope, with a constant friction force $\vec{F}_{f}$.

In theory, we can solve this with newton. 
Do we want to is a different question.
Let's use energy instead.

We know at the end, $E_{kin}(2)-E_{kin}(1)=W^{ext}_{1\to2}=W(m\vec{g})+W(\vec{s})+W(\vec{F}_{f})$

We can immediately remove $W(\vec{s})$, as it's perpendicular to the trajectory, so it can be safely ignored.

If we look at the friction's work, we can notice really quickly that $W(\vec{F}_{f})=\int \vec{F}_{f}\cdot d\vec{r}$
we know that, as they align with each other, we get - the multiplication of both vectors, which is constant. This means we can remove it from the integral.

$W(\vec{F}_{f})=-\int_{1}^{2}dr_{cm}=-f(2-1)=-f$

We can do a similar thing for the weight, assuming we know the angle of the slope, which we'll call $\alpha$.

It's work will be $W(m\vec{g})=\int_{1}^{2}m\vec{g}\cdot d\vec{r}_{cm}=m\vec{g}\cdot d\vec{r}_{cm}=m\vec{g}\cdot \vec{L}=mgL\cos(\alpha)=mgh$

And what's nice is that this result for the weight doesn't depend on the length of the road, only the height. 
It's also interesting that if an object falls vertically and then is moved sideways, the resulting work stays the same. 

This also gives us the very important formula of the potential energy, $mgh$, but we'll learn about it later.

In any case, this allows us to find the speed at the end of the trajectory, at point 2, which is:

$v^{2}_{2}=v^{2}_{1}+2gh- \frac{2fL}{m}$

## Last minute additional notes

The work of a force is in essence it's contribution to the change in kinetic energy.
- the kinetic energy increases if the force is (completely or partially) aligned with the direction of movement
- It will lower if it's the force is opposed to the direction of movement
- It won't change if it's perpendicular
None of this means anything for actual speed, only the energy. 

In most cases, work depends on the actual length of travel, think of something like friction. 

Lastly, the theorem of kinetic energy is very effective for many applications, however as it ignores normal forces and time, it loses quite a bit of information. The total information is only really available through Newton[^2]. See exercises 3 and 5 of the 8th exercise series. 



[[1. Conservation of energy|Previous]]

[^1]:One of the ways to write

[^2]:This guy again...
