
A conservative force is a force for which the work on the object only depends on the ends of the path.

An example would be the weight $m\vec{g}$.
At every point of the trajectory $\Gamma$, the weight is always the same (assuming this happens on earth, and the gravity is roughly the same everywhere). 

So, if we have a typical ballistic trajectory:
When going up,the weight is opposed to the trajectory, and its work is negative. 
When going down, the weight is aligned with the trajectory, meaning its work is positive.

What does this mean?
Well, between position $\vec{r}_{1}$ at instant $t_{1}$ and position $\vec{r}_{2}$ at instant $t_{2}$, the work of the weight is given by the following equation:

$W_{1\to2}(m\vec{g})=\int_{1}^{2}m\vec{g}\cdot d\vec{r_{cm}}=m\vec{g}\cdot\int_{1}^{2}d\vec{r}_{cm}$

We can take mg out of the integral as it's a constant. 

And what's nice is that the integral of all these small vectors, is the sum of all of them, so just $\vec{r}_{2}-\vec{r}_{1}$, which we'll refer to as $\vec{l}$.
This means that the work is $W_{1\to2}=m\vec{g}\cdot\vec{l}=m\vec{g}\cdot(r_{2}-r_{1})$.
This itself can be rewritten as:

$$
= -(m\vec{g}\cdot \vec{r}_{1})-(-m\vec{g}\cdot\vec{r_2})
$$

This allows us to define the potential energy (of gravity (near the earth)), briefly mentioned before.

$$E_{p.g.}(\vec{r})=-m\vec{g}\cdot\vec{r}+C$$

And this allows us to write:

$$
W_{1\to2}(m\vec{g})=E_{p.g.}(r_{1})-E_{p.g.}(r_{2})
$$


It's worth noting that, if we were to build this, we'd quickly notice that the following equation holds true:
$m\vec{g}\cdot\vec{r}=mgr\cos\alpha$

And it's quite similar to a projection of $\vec{r}$ on $\vec{e}_{y}$, which is just a vertical vector of length 1, which gives us the vertical component of $\vec{r}$, times g, which gives us the formula everyone actually uses: $E_{p.g.}(\vec{r})=mgh+C$
And thus, $W(m\vec{g})=(mgh_{1}+C)-(mgh_{2}+C)=mg(h_1-h_2)$

## Other potential energies

Well, first a generalization of the potential of gravity:

The relevant force is $\vec{F}=-G\frac{m_{1}m_{2}}{r^{2}}$

The potential energy will be: $E_{pot}(\vec{r})-G \frac{m_{1}m_{2}}{r}+C$

Anyhow, as for the others:

Coulomb's force: $\vec{F}= \frac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}} \frac{q_{1}q_{2}}{r^{2}}\vec{e}_{r}$ (seems similar to something...)

It's potential energy: $E_{pot}(\vec{r})= \frac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}} \frac{q_{1}q_{2}}{r}+C$

Elastic force: $\vec{F}= -k\vec{d}$

It's potential energy is: $E_{pot}(\vec{d})= \frac{1}{2}kd^{2}+C$, where $\vec{d}$ is the deformation.

## A small note on C

The position vector $\vec{r}$ depends on the choice of the origin, meaning a change in origin is the addition of the same translation vector to every position.

Thus most things are defined to some arbitrary constant, depending on the choice of origin. It doesn't make a difference when calculating work, as it requires a difference of potential energy. 

The work of a conservative force is measured as a difference of potential energy.

$$
W(\vec{F}^{ext}_{const})=\int_{1}^{2}\vec{F}^{ext}_{const}\cdot d\vec{r}_{cm}=E_{pot}(\vec{r}_{1})-E_{pot}(\vec{r_{2}})
$$

If we suppose all forces in a problem are conservative, the theorem of kinetic energy becomes:

$$
E_{kin}(2)-E_{kin}(1)=W_{1\to2}(\vec{F}^{ext})=E_{pot}(1)-E_{pot}(2)
$$

Or

$$
E_{kin}(2)+E_{pot}(2)=E_{kin}(1)+E_{kin}(2)
$$

We define the sum of the kinetic and potential energy of an object to be it's mechanical energy: $E_{mec}=E_{kin}+E_{pot}$

And what's nice is here we get another way to show conservation of energy if all energies are conservative, as this means the mechanical energy of the center of mass is conserved, meaning it's a constant.

If we are dealing with forces that aren't all conservative, we can simply add the difference. So, if we have friction, we get the initial mechanical energy, minus whatever the friction did.
That is to say:

$$
E_{mec}(2)-E_{mec}(1)=W_{1\to2}(\vec{F}^{ext}_{non-cons.})
$$

With $W_{1\to2}(\vec{F}^{ext})=W_{1\to2}(\vec{F}^{ext}_{cons.})+W_{1\to2}(\vec{F}^{ext}_{non-cons.})$


[[2. Kinetic energy and work|Previous]]
[[4. Power|Next]]
