
Newton[^1] also had a hand in physics[^2].

Here's his first law:

An object in motion doesn't feel an action iff ($\iff$) it's movement is rectilinear, and uniform. ($\vec{a}=\vec{0}$)


This is also called the principle of inertia[^3]

An example is if I throw something in outer space, it won't stop[^4]

Another way to formulate this is "an object in motion stays in motion". 

You'd think this would be obvious....

## Reference frames

Anyhow, we need to talk about inertial reference frames, which are, shocker, frames of reference where the principle of inertia is correct. We also call these reference frames Galileans[^5]. 

When it comes to examples of Galilean reference frames, a decent example would be a ice skate ring, that's (close enough to) friction-less, and the reference frame is static (to someone inside the ring).
However, not all reference frames are created equal, if we (somehow) took that ice skate ring and put it in a truck, when the truck accelerates, the ice skate ring also changes speed, which makes it not an inertial reference frame (still to someone inside the ring), as something inside it would start moving without us acting on it.

So, question: is earth an inertial reference frame?
No, as it's turning on it's own axis, and around the sun. An experiment to show it is for example the Foucault pendulum. However, in most experiments it's close enough to static.


[[5. Some movement examples|Previous chapter - movement in a plane]]
[[2. Newton's second law|Next]]


[^1]:The bastard I've mentioned a couple times that invented everything that Euler didn't in Mathematics

[^2]:Hence why we call the stuff we do Newtonian Mechanics.

[^3]:Much better name imo, partly because it doesn't mention Newton.

[^4]:No, shut up general relativity, I do not care.

[^5]:Finally someone who isn't Newton. Gosh
