
## Curvilinear abscissa s, frame of reference linked to the position of the trajectory T

For now, we've mostly been working in fixed orthonormal reference frames. 

We can also notice that pretty much every trajectory can be turned into a large number of circles, which allows us to do a number of things.

If we generalize some stuff, we get If we take some point on the trajectory T as origin O:

We choose a positive direction of movement. The position of an object will be given by the (signed) algebraic distance of a certain point measured along T.

Say s is the Curviligne abscissa of the point P of T.

If s is greater than 0, P is "in front of" O along $\vec{e}_{t}$
If s is lesser than 0, P is "behind" O along $\vec{e}_{t}$

We then define for every point of T a reference frame $(\vec{e_{t}},\vec{e_{n}})$, where:
- $\vec{e}_t$ being the tangent of T at point P, giving us the positive direction, whose length is 1
- $\vec{e}_{n}$ being the normal vector of T at point P, perpendicular to T, with also a length of 1, typically directed towards the rotation center.


### How does this impact speed

At every point of the trajectory T, the speed (which is always tangent to T) can be written $\vec{v}=v\vec{e}_{t}$, where $v$ is the (scalar) speed, which is the speed in the direction of $\vec{e}_{t}$. 

We can also define it in a more precise way, which is $\lim\limits_{\Delta t\to0}\frac{\Delta s}{\Delta t}=\dot{s}=\frac{ds}{dt}$
Which is the amount of variation of the curvilinear abscissa.

### Accelerations

At any point of T, we can describe it using $\vec{e}_{t}$ and $\vec{e}_{n}$

$\vec{a}=\vec{a}_{n}+\vec{a}_{t}$

This can be broken down into:

$\vec{a}_{n}=a_{n}\vec{e}_{n}$
$\vec{a}_{t}=a_{t}\vec{e}_{t}$

As we know the tangential acceleration (along T) is written $a_{t}=\lim\limits_{\Delta t\to0} \frac{\Delta v}{\Delta t}=\dot{v}=\ddot{s}$

We can, on the document linked to in [[9. Mathematical intermède|here]], we can show the normal acceleration is given using :

$$|a_{n}|=\frac{v^{2}}{R}$$

R is the radius of the curve.

This is what we call the centripetal[^1] acceleration. 

## Circular movement and angular variables.

Say we have a mass m moving on a circular trajectory T. 

The trajectory has a radius R, an origin O, and s, the curvilinear distance between O and the mass.

We can define that $\phi$ is the angle between O and the mass.
We thus know that $s=R\phi$ (if $\phi$ is in radians). This is basic trig, look [[1. Angles#Circular detour|here]].

We know $v=\dot{s}=R\dot{\phi}=R\omega$, where $\omega$ is $\dot{\phi}$ and the angular speed.

From there, we can find the tangent and normal acceleration:

$a_{t}=\dot{v}=R\ddot{\phi}=R\gamma$, where $\gamma$ is $\dot{\omega}$ and the angular acceleration.\
$a_{n}=\frac{v^{2}}{R}=\frac{R^{2}\omega^{2}}{R}=R\omega^{2}$

If the scalar speed is constant, $a_{t}=0$, and we define the period T to be $\frac{2\pi R}{v}=\frac{2\pi}{\omega}$
This also means $\omega=\frac{2\pi}{T}$

## Example - a simple pendulum

In the case of a simple pendulum, we have to forces acting on it, which are gravity and the tension of the string.

Along $\vec{e}_{t}$, we have one of the component of $m\vec{g}$ along $\vec{e}_{t}\to a_{t}$ 
Along $\vec{e}_{n}$, we have the tension on the string, as well as the component of $m\vec{g}$ along $\vec{e}_{n}$



[^1]:As in towards the center
