
If an object in motion is acted upon iff ($\iff$) it's speed changes

It's a bit better known under it's mathematical formulation:

$$
\vec{F}=m\vec{a}
$$

Where:
- $\vec{F}$ is the sum of the forces acting on the object
- m is the object's mass (NOT WEIGHT)
- $\vec{a}$ is the object's acceleration

>[!note]-
>$\vec{F}$ is the notation for the sum of forces I'm going to use, I know that $\sum\vec{F}$ is technically more correct, but I'm waaay to lazy to add the sum in every time.

As mass is always positive, not only will the sum of forces be // to the acceleration, but also pointing in the same direction. 

This allows us to have a better name for the action that modifies or the lack of which doesn't modify the speed: Force.

Force is measured in Newtons[^1], and in base SI unit's it's $kg \frac{m}{s^2}$

Here is where I would include an example drawing of a box on wheels being pulled by a counterweight attached to it by a string, if I could draw. 

What we find from that, is that the tension in the string is equal in magnitude on both sides, as is the acceleration of both the box and the counterweight. 

## Additional details

Forces are what causes movement.
Acceleration is the consequence of force. 

$\vec{a}$ and $\vec{F}$ are // to each other, and look in the same exact direction. 

The more matter the object contains (== the greater m is), the more complicated it is to change it's speed (inertia)


Some small examples:

We have a force opposed to the speed, it causes a slow down, because it's acceleration is in the opposite direction to the speed.

We have a force that isn't // to the speed (a lateral force), the force will cause a turn. The force indicates (is directed towards) the inside of the turn. If we for example look at a pendulum, we'll notice a lot of things, like the fact the acceleration isn't constant.

We have a box on an incline, we have a friction and a normal force[^2] as well as gravity. 
If we were to take an origin, with the base vectors being relative to the angle of the incline:
From $\vec{e}_{x}:0+f-m\vec{g}\sin(\alpha)=m\vec{a}_{x}$
From $\vec{e}_{y}:S+0-mg\sin(\alpha)=m\vec{a}_{y}$


Anyhow, back to additional details:
If the sum of the forces is $\vec{0}$ (is null)?

It implies that if an object is static, it's $\vec{F}$ is equal to 0. However, if an object is moving at a constant speed, the sum of forces acting on it is also 0. The means the opposite isn't always true.

We can therefore say two things:

$static \implies \vec{F} = \vec{0}$
and
$\vec{F}=\vec{0} \iff \vec{v} = const$

[[1. Newton's first law|Previous]]
[[3. Particular forces|Next]]

[^1]:Of course...

[^2]:N.d.T. *Force de soutien* doesn't translate well, that's what it's called in English

