
## Remote forces

That is to say, forces that act at a distance without direct contact.

>[!note]- Quantum note
>Yeah, if we break this down to the quantum level, technically all forces are like that, because of ✨Quantum field theory✨


### Gravity (for real this time)

If we take any two objects, we will notice they attract each other[^1]. 

The direction of the force is obvious, it's pointing from one object[^2] to the other[^2].

The magnitude is a bit more difficult:

$$||\vec{F}||=G \frac{m_{1}\cdot m_{2}}{r^{2}}$$

With G being the gravitational constant, or roughly $6.67\cdot10^{-11}Nkg^{-2}m^{2}$, and r being the distance between the objects. Why is it represented as r instead of something sensible like d? I don't know, ask Newton[^3]

Notice how G is tiny. Like abysmally small. This is why gravity is ridiculously weak, to the point where you can somewhat beat it simply by jumping. The only reason it's so important is because the earth is equally ridiculously massive, making us feel a fairly decent force towards it. 

This is also why we say g is 9.81, because if we plug in the earth and something at it's surface, knowing G, the mass of the earth being $5.97\cdot10^{24}$, it's radius being 6'371km = 6'371'000m, and what it's attracting being negligible comparatively:

$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
||\vec{F}||= 6.67\cdot10^{-11}\frac{5.972\cdot10^{24}}{6371000^{2}} \\
=0.0000000000667\frac{5972000000000000000000000}{40589641000000}\\
\approx9.81
\end{split}
\end{equation}
$$


Well, another way to find this better is

$$
mg = m G \frac{10^{24}}{6371000^{2}}\approx m\cdot9.81
$$

Because now we have the value of the acceleration due to gravity as a number, because of $\vec{F}=m\vec{a}$. 

This also shows the acceleration is independent of the mass, and all objects in free fall (assuming no friction and such) fall in the same way.

### Electric forces

It's basically the same, but with electric charges, except they can attract and repel. Luckily, we're doing this next semester. 

### Magnetic forces

It's the same as electric just in different circumstances. They're later combined into electromagnetism and all the ✨wonderful fun stuff✨[^4] that entails.

## Contact forces

These are the forces that, no way who could have possibly thought of it, require contact to happen. Think traction (something getting pulled on), pressure (a table's normal force, me punching someone in the face), or friction (well, that's about it really).

These forces are transmitted by contact. 

Anyhow, let's ignore all that, and talk about (elastic) springs. Because that's allegedly a good example of a traction-type force.

So, imagine a wall, with a spring attached to it sideways, with it's restful length ($l_{0}$), and a (constant (we're ignoring temperature)) rigidity k, which is how resistant to deformation it is.

If we pull on it with a force, a certain deformation $\vec{d}$ will occur. Now, according to the rigidity, the spring might not want to change, and will thus exercise it's own force to regain it's shape, proportional to the $\Delta l$, that is the change in length. That also works if the spring is compressed.

Mathematically:

$\vec{F}=-k\vec{d}$

That is to say, the more things change, the more they (want to) stay the same.
Unless you pull on the spring to go from elastic to plastic deformation, but that's besides the point and current topic.

Because of how it works, for compression the force is repulsive, and for elongation the force is attractive. Way to do double standards...

### Example: object on a spring

magine an immobile object on a spring, and we want to find the deformation.

Imagine a spring attached to the ceiling, with some object at the end.

So, because the object is immobile, $\sum\limits\vec{F}=0$

We have two forces:
The spring's, and gravity.

We thus know:

$F_{s}+F_{g}=0$

From there and knowledge of how gravity and springs work, we can solve this to get $d= \frac{mg}{k} > 0$.



[[2. Newton's second law|Previous]]
[[4. Quantity of movement|Next]]


[^1]:which is to say yes, even you technically attract your crush.

[^2]:'s center of gravity

[^3]:[because it's always bloody Newton.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_gravitational_theory#Newton's_law_of_universal_gravitation) At least he didn't invent quantum field theory...

[^4]:read: bullshit
