
Basically, if you punch a wall, it hurts.

In more professional terms:

We can observe that for two parts of an object, the force $\vec{F}_{1\to2}$, exerted by part 1 on part 2 and the force $\vec{F}_{2\to1}$, exerted by part 2 on part 1, will look in the opposite direction, but have the same magnitude.


An example:

If we take $O_1$ and $O_2$, two masses, as a single object, they affect each other by gravity.

$F_{2\to1}$ acts on part 1. 
$F_{1\to2}$ acts on part 2.

If we draw this, both forces point towards each other, and are as long as one another.

Now, this is  only gravity, a force that attracts. However, a force like the electromagnetic one, can be repulsive, in this case the only thing that changes is the direction of the force, changing from pointing towards each other and instead away from each other.

In other terms: $\vec{F}_{1\to2}=-\vec{F}_{2\to1}$.

In quote terms:

> "each action has an equal and opposite reaction"
> *- Newton, as usual.*

In more different terms for no reason it seems:

In the sum of forces intervening in newton's second law, the internal forces (that is to say the forces between the various internal components) cancel out two by two. Only external forces change the total quantity of movement of the object: $\vec{F}^{ext}=\dot{\vec{P}}$.

Basically, when doing dynamics, we only need consider external forces. 

## Example: collision


We have two wagons of mass $m_{1}$ and $m_{2}$ respectively, with speeds $v_{1}$ and $v_{2}$ going in opposite directions.

So:
- Objects: the two wagons
- Forces (ext.): gravity and normal

So, at time $t_{c}$, they collide.

What happens?

Well, ignoring many unknown internal forces, we know that before, during, and after, the sum of internal forces is 0, and gravity and the normal force cancel out, so $\vec{F}=\vec{0}$.

After the collision, there are a couple of scenarios:

1. They get destroyed. 
2. They stop moving.
3. The interesting one

The interesting scenario is that the speeds and weights of the wagons don't match, and the collision was elastic, so no deformations nothing breaks, no lost energy.

We know, that because $\vec{F}=\vec{0}$, the quantity of movement remains the same, which means that the complex mechanism of the shock didn't exactly intervene much.

This all means:

$m_{1}\vec{v}_{1}+m_{2}\vec{v}_{2}=m_{1}\vec{v}_{1}'+m_{2}\vec{v}_{2}'$

the first part being before, the second after.

[[4. Quantity of movement|Previous]]
