
Take an object, which is made up of a number of parts, at positions $\vec{r}_i,i=1,2,3,4,\dots$.

We define the position of the center of mass (CM) of the object as the weighted average of the positions $\vec{r}$.

$$\vec{r}_{cm}=\frac{m_{1}\vec{r}_{1}+m_{2}\vec{r}_{2}+\dots+m_{n}\vec{r}_{n}}{m_{1}+m_{2}+\dots+m_{n}}$$

Where $m_{1}+m_{2}+\dots+m_{n}$ is the total mass of the object.

There are a couple of different types of centers of mass, some easier to find some harder.

The nicest one is the symmetric one, where every point has the same mass, and you just take the point in the (geometric) middle.

Another one is the asymmetric one, which works in the same way, just it's moved towards the heavier part. An easier way to show this is by moving the position of the origin to one of the points, and calculating everything, as it'll simplify some values. If we first also simplify it to two points, it helps a lot.

Basically, if an object is homogeneous, you're in luck. If it isn't, you're screwed, but not too much as it's not difficult to calculate, just tedious. 

It can also be a good idea to break down an object into smaller objects made of different materials, so that you can calculate their CMs individually, and from there calculate the CM of the entire object. 


Now, we've already used the sum of masses in a couple of places, most notably in newton's third law, with the quantity of movement, which we can now rewrite as:

$$$\vec{P}=m_{1}\vec{v}_{1}+m_{2}\vec{v}_{2}+\dots+m_{n}\vec{v}_{n}= \frac{d}{dt}(m_{1}\vec{r}_{1}+m_{2}\vec{r}_{2}+\dots+m_{n}\vec{r}_{n})=\frac{d}{dt}(m\vec{r}_{cm})=m\vec{v}_{cm}$$

With the hypothesis that mass is constant.

This allows us to say that the amount of movement of the complete object is also the one of a mass equal to the total mass m at point $\vec{r}_{cm}$, moving at speed $\vec{v}_{cm}$.


Now, if we look a bit at newton's second law...

$$\vec{F}^{ext}=\dot{\vec{P}}=\frac{d}{dt}\vec{P}=\frac{d}{dt}(m\vec{v}_{cm})=m \frac{d}{dt}\vec{v}_{cm}=m\vec{a}_{cm}$$

In other terms, the sum of all external forces is the mass times the acceleration of the center of mass.


If we take an example of a symmetric weight in movement, that was thrown upwards and sideways. We'll notice that the weights on either side will move in a chaotic hardly predictable way. However, if we look at the center of mass, it's trajectory will be a parabola, because the only external force will be gravity, and all the internal forces of the weights will cancel out. 



[[5. Newton's third law|Previous]]
[[7. Pressure|Next]]
