
## States of matter

There are 3 that matter, and a bunch more that don't. Well, they do, but not yet anyways.

They are:
- Solids (they are rigid and their molecules don't tend to move much)
- Liquids (their molecules can move, and they are only a little bit compressible)
- Gases (their molecules move a lot, and they are quite compressible.)

## Definition of a fluid

We define a fluid to be a medium that deforms when acted upon by any tangential force.
That's it. By our previous thing, this applies to liquids and gases.

## Forces in a fluid at rest

The forces that a fluid at rest exerts on an immobile object inside the fluid will be exclusively normal to it's faces. As the fluid is at rest, it doesn't get forces to act with the object upon (otherwise it'd just deform using Newton's 3rd law).

The forces being perpendicular to the object's surface is neat for calculating pressure.
It's also worth noting that the object can be another fluid (think of a bit of oil floating on water because you failed a 3rd grade science experiment and everything went downhill from there).

## Pascal's law

> The intensity of the force exerted by the liquid on a surface is independent of the orientation of the surface, but only on it's area and it's position in the fluid.

This means we only need to find the pressure of the fluid to find a whole bunch of data.

## Hydrostatic law

We can easily determine experimentally that the pressure in a fluid is proportional to the depth.

If we were to model this, we'd realize that: each individual bit of fluid is affected by gravity, and that every bit of fluid is being pressed on by every bit of fluid above it. 
This implies the pressure would be g times h, which is the depth, times some variable $\rho$, that would be the mass of a volume of the fluid.

Which gives us $P = \rho g h$, which is the formula to calculate hydrostatic pressure.

It's worth noting that this also applies in the air, and in any fluid. 

It's also worth looking at it like this:
The force of gravity is $mg$, we have g, but getting m is more complex. To get m, we have the option of the volume times the volumetric mass. What we do here, is we multiply the height $h [m]$ by the volumetric mass $\rho[kg/m^{3}]$, which doesn't result in a force as the surface isn't  cancelled out $m * \frac{kg}{m^{3}} * \frac{F}{kg}= \frac{kg}{m^{2}} * \frac{F}{kg} = \frac{F}{m^{2}}$, but instead a force divided by an area, which is a pressure. 

Of course, we suppose $\rho$ is constant in a fluid. 

Another way to look at this using purely Newton is to notice we have 5 forces (in 2D):

the force of gravity on a bit of water
the force from below
the force from above
the 2 lateral forces.

The 2 lateral forces cancel out, leaving us with:

$m\vec{g}+\vec{F}_{under}+\vec{F}_{over}=\vec{0}$

On $e_{x}$, everything is 0.

On $e_{y}$, we can find:

$-\rho_{fluid}(h_{2}-h_{1})Sg+P(h_{1})S+P(h_{2})S=0$
$P(h_{1)}-P(h_{2})=\rho_{fluid}(h_{2}-h_{1})g$

In other terms:

$P(h_{1})=P(h_{2})+\rho_{fluid}(h_{2}-h_{1})g$

This makes sense, the pressure increases with the depth.

The hydrostatic law shows us that the pressure is the same at any given depth of a fluid, and different from every other depth. 

If it's not happening in a vacuum, at any depth it's also impacted by the air pressure above it, though it cancels out for 80% of purposes.

We can also use this to calculate atmospheric pressure using a bit of mercury and a whole bunch of it's toxic fumes, but I feel like that's going to be touched upon at a later date.

## Archimedes' principle

As pressure increases with depth in a fluid, we get a force, called Archimedes' force cause it was discovered by some Ancient Greek guy (who later moved to Syracuse, Sicily, modern day Italy) called Archimedes. 

If an object is submerged in a liquid, the differences in pressure will result in a force being applied to the object from below.

So, say we have 2 objects, both of the same volume, both of different mass.

If we chuck the heavier one in water, and it floats at one depth, supported by Archimedes' force against gravity, the second object will float higher, because less pressure is going to be needed to support it, as it's mass is lower, but the pressure it'd receive below would be the same.

The force is defined/calculated as follows:

$\vec{F}_{A}=\rho_{liq.}*V_{sub}*\vec{g}$

So the volumetric mass of the liquid, times the volume, times the gravitational constant.
This force is equal and opposite to the weight of the fluid moved.

It's also worth noting that Archimedes' force is applied at the center of mass of the moved fluid (so not necessarily at the center of mass of the object, which'll be important when we start working with rotations).

There are also 3 cases we can note:

1) $||m\vec{g}||=||\vec{F}_A||$ - balance (the object floats somewhere inside the liquid)
2) $||m\vec{g}||>||\vec{F}_{A}||$ - the object sinks
3) $||m\vec{g}||<||\vec{F}_{A}||$ - the object floats (boat)

That's how boats and hot air balloons work.

An object floating between two liquids (ex. water and air) will have two Archimedes' forces applied to it, one for the volume it occupies in each fluid.

## Example

Knowing air pressure near the surface of the earth is $0.95*10^{5}Pa\le P_{air}\le1.05*10^{5}$

Knowing air pressure at $P(h_{0})=P_{0}=1atm$ at $h_{0}=10m$ above the surface of the water, what's the pressure 1m under the water?

We have two isobars at:
$h_0 = 10m$ and $h_{1}=-1m$

We need to find $P_{1}=P(h_{1})$

Using the law of hydrostatic, we can find that in the air it's going to be:
in the air: $P(0)-P(h_{0})=\rho_{air}(h_{0}-0)g$
in the water: $P(h_{1})-P(0)=\rho_{water}(0-h_{1})g$

So, numerically

$P(0)=P(H_{0})+\rho_{air}h_{0}g\approx 1.10310^{5}+1.3*10*9.81\approx1.014*10^{5}Pa$ (an increase of about 10 Pa per meter)
$P(h_{1})=P(0)+\rho_{water}(-h_{1})g\approx1.014*10^5+10^{3}*1*9.81\approx1.112*10^5Pa$ (an increase of about 0.1 atm/m=$10^{4}$ Pa)


A couple additional things to look up that help a bit with understanding is how hydraulic presses work, and Pascal's barrel experiment.

## More things

We've been talking about hydrostatics mostly, well it's time to mention hydrodynamics.

What happens to Archimedes' force if the fluid uniformly accelerated?



[[7. Pressure|Previous]]