
Remember [[1. Vector|vectors]]? Well, you'll need them. A lot.

In analytic geometry, we did a bit of vectors.
One of the important things we found out that using 2 non-colinear vectors, we can  describe any other 2D vector. Keep this in mind for later.

## Structure of a vector

The set $\mathbb{R}^{2}$ can have access to scalar multiplication, and addition.

$$\mathbb{R}^{2}=\{(x,y)|x,y\in\mathbb{R}\}=\{(0,0),(2,3),(1,-7),(1/3,1/2)\dots\}$$

That's nice, because we can using this define it as a set of points.
It's not nice, because points become really useless really quick, and are replaced with something much more powerful: vectors.

This only requires a small change: we need to redefine vectors a bit. 

Well, let's look at them a bit from a geometry perspective.

## Vector lines of R2

say $v_{1}\in\mathbb{R}^{2}$ and:

$V=Vect(v_{1})=\{t_{1}v_{1}|t_{1}\in\mathbb{R}\}$

This gives us a line, as it's every multiplication of some vector.
The only exception being (0,0), which multiplied by anything gives us (0,0).

It's also worth noting that with our current definition, every vector starts from, and any line goes through (0,0)...

Lastly, we can turn that line into an equation, that'd look like this using matrices: $V=\begin{vmatrix}x&\alpha\\ y&\beta\end{vmatrix}=0$ (so where $\beta x=\alpha y$)

to summarize, if $v_{1}\ne(0,0)$, we say that V is the vector line created by $v_{1}$, and that $v_{1}$ is **a** base of V.

## Bases of R2 and coordinates


Say there are two vectors $v_1$, and $v_{2}$, which we combine as follows

$V=Vect(v_{1},v_{2})=\{t_{1}v_{1}+t_{2}v_{2}|t_{1},t_{2}\in\mathbb{R}\}$

Through this, we can essentially get the set of all linear combinations of $v_{1}$ and $v_{2}$, for which we have a number of cases:

$v_{1}=v_{2}=(0,0)$ => then you only get (0,0)
$v_{1}\ne v_{2}=(0,0)$ => you get the line of $v_{1}$
$v_{1}=k\cdot v_{2}$ => you get the line described by $v_1$ and $v_2$
$v_{1}\ne v_{2}$ => you get $\mathbb{R}^{2}$.

We're mostly interested in the last case. We can form using it something we call a base, $B=v_{1},v_{2}$. It is a base of $\mathbb{R}^{2}$.

Using that same base, you can decompose every single other unique vector, in a unique way.

$v=t_{1}v_{1}+t_{2}v_{2}$

And this finally allows us to get a thing called coordinates:

$[v]_{B}=\binom{t_{1}}{t_{2}}$

$t_{1}$ and $t_{2}$ become the coordinates of v in the base B.

### Examples

a. $v_{1}=(1,0), v_{2}=(0,1)$
This is called the cannonic base of $\mathbb{R}^{2}$, noted $B_{can}$. For any $v=(x,y)\in\mathbb{R}$, we have $v=x(1,0)+y(0,1)$

b. $v_{1}=(0,2),v_{2}=(\frac{1}{3},0)$
Now, we have v being:
$v=?(0,2)+?(\frac{1}{3},0)$

The equivalent of the v in $B_{can}$ in here would be $[v]_{B}=\binom{\frac{y}{2}}{3x}$

It's worth noting v hasn't changed, it's the same vector. What changed is merely how we look at it, how it's represented in the frame of reference we currently care about.

c. General case:

$v=t_{1}v_{1}+t_{2}v_{2}$
$\iff (x,y)=(t_{1}\alpha,t_{1}\beta)+(t_{2}\gamma,t_{2}\delta)$
$\iff (\alpha t_{1}+\gamma t_{2}, \beta t_{1}+\delta t_{2})$
$\iff \begin{cases}x=\alpha t_{1}+\gamma t_{2} \\ y=\beta t_{1}+\delta t_{2}\end{cases}$

That last one can be turned into a matrix multiplication:

$$\begin{bmatrix}x\\ y\end{bmatrix}=\begin{bmatrix}\alpha &\gamma\\\beta&\delta\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}t_{1}\\ t_{2}\end{bmatrix}$$
We'll call that matrix P now.

P is called a passage matrix, it turns one set of coordinates into another.

What's nice about it is that $P^{-1}$ can turn $\binom{x}{y}$ back into $\binom{t_{1}}{t_{2}}$.

Example: $v_{1}=(3,1),v_{2}=(-1,1)$

These two aren't scalar multiples, so $B=v_{1},v_{2}$ is possible.

$P=\begin{bmatrix}3 & -1\\ 1 & 1\end{bmatrix}\iff P^{-1}=\frac{1}{4}\begin{bmatrix}1 & 1 \\ -1 & 3\end{bmatrix}$

So:

$[v]_{B}=P^{-1}[V]_{B_{can}}=\frac{1}{4}\begin{bmatrix}1&1\\-1&3\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}x\\ y\end{bmatrix}=\begin{bmatrix} \frac{x+y}{4}\\ \frac{-x+3y}{4}\end{bmatrix}$

If we were to use this with for example $v=(7,1)$, using this we can quickly find it in the new base to be (2, -1) by plugging it's x and y into it. Same with (3, 1) and (1, 0), and some other fun stuff.

TLDR: from now till the end of the semester, a vector is a list containing 2 numbers, that has some fun properties.

## Additional vocab

A subset $V\subset\mathbb{R}^{2}$ is called a vector subspace of $\mathbb{R}^{2}$.
It exists of multiple types, which are a null one, it's only got (0,0) in it, a line, you can guess what it contains, and $\mathbb{R}^{2}$. 
It can be thus dimension 0, dimension 1, or dimension 2.


[[1. What are Matrices|Previous]]
[[3. Linear application from R2 to R2|Next]]
