
So, you have something, and you need to know what power you need to raise it to to get something else. Apparently, mathematicians have been pondering the same question for ages, because they invented, quite a while ago logarithms.

>[!notes]- A brief history of logarithms, for history nerds such as myself
>The earliest logarithms we've found were those of Babylon, dating back to roughly 2000 BCE.
>In 1614, in the middle of the 80 years war between Spain and the Netherlands, a guy named Napier established 'log tables', which is essentially a big book of various values of logs.
>Bit later, Kepler uses these tables to simplify a bit some astronomical calculations.
>In 1647, the year before the treaty of Westfalia, that signifies the end of the 80 years war, as well as the 30 years war that started in the meantime, some other guy named St Vincent studies the area under the curve of 1/x...
>In 1661, when Europe was again ablaze due to some conflict or another, Huygens discovered that that area is that of a logarithm.

So, to solve $3^{x}=9$, that's easy, because it's easy to remember that x is 2.
If we pretend you don't know that, that whole thing can be re-written $x=\log_{3}(9)$, which is the same as $x=2$.

## Natural logarithm


In a Cartesian frame of reference (O,t,y), we can consider the curve $y=\frac{1}{t},~(t>0)$, for x greater than 0, we consider the area delimited by the lines t=1, y=0, and the curve $y=\frac{1}{t}$.
The area is signed, which means it's positive it x is greater than 1, null at 1, and negative if it's letter than 1.

The natural logarithm, noted $\ln$, is defined as $\ln:]0,+\infty[\to\mathbb{R}, x\to\text{The signed area delimited by t=1, t=x,y=0, and y=}\frac{1}{t}$.

A cool thing about this is that the unsigned area under the curve between two points A and B with 0<a<b, is given by the equation $A=\ln(b)-\ln(a)$.

## Algebraic properties

So, some properties, which we might have to prove:

- $\ln(1)=0$
- $\ln(xy)=\ln(x)+\ln(y)$
- $\ln(\frac{1}{x})=-\ln(x)$
- $\ln(x^{p})=p\ln(x)$

Logarithms are fun, because they're a fundamentally geometric concept, that is very useful in analysis. Unfortunately, this also means I can't adequately explain stuff, as I can't draw on this.

Anyhow, we can prove that the transformation $(a,b)\to(ya, \frac{1}{y}b)$ keeps areas the same, using rectangles, which I can't or using matrices, by realizing that this transformation is represented by $\begin{bmatrix}y&0\\0& \frac{1}{y}\end{bmatrix}$, whose determinant is 1, which means it's areas remain the same.


There's geometric proofs for ln(1) and ln(xy), which I won't go into, they just make sense, and try plotting out what that means in terms of area, it'll be fun.

The proof for ln(1/x) is a bit simpler: $0\ln(1)= \ln(x\cdot \frac{1}{x})=\ln(x)+\ln(\frac{1}{x})\implies-\ln(x)=\ln(\frac{1}{x})$.

The proof for ln(x^p) is easier with recursion.

Let's start with proving it for natural numbers.

The proof for n = 0 is trivial, because we have $\ln(x^{0})=\ln(1)=0=0\ln(x)$.

If we suppose that $\ln(x^{n})=n\ln(x)$, we need to show that $\ln(x^{n+1})=(n+1)\ln(x)$.

$$
\begin{split}
\ln(x^{n+1})=\ln(x\cdot x^{n})\\
=\ln(x)+\ln(x^{n})\\
=\ln(x)+n\ln(x)\\
=(n+1)\ln(x)
\end{split}
$$
Which proves it.

From there we can then show the same thing progressively further along the sets until we arrive at real numbers, but aint nobody got time for that.

## Analytical properties

1. ln is strictly increasing
2. ln is continuous on $]0;+\infty[$
3. ln is bijective from $]0;+\infty[\text{ to }\mathbb{R}$

To show the first point, we've mentioned that $\ln(b)-\ln(a)$ is the unsigned area, as it only works if b is greater than a, l so $\ln(b)-\ln(a)\gt0$.

to show two:
We need to find two quantities that'll box in $\ln(x)-\ln(x_{0})$. We can geometrically find that there's two rectangles that'll be always one smaller one bigger in size than the area between 

x and x0. They are $(x-x_{0})(\frac{1}{x})$ and $(x-x_{0})(\frac{1}{x_{0}})$

From there, we have $\lim\frac{x-x_{0}}{x}\le\lim \ln(x)-\ln(x_{0})\le\lim(\frac{1}{x_{0}}(x-x_{0}))$

As x-x0 gets closer and closer to 0 as x approaches x0, we get that both are 0. This works both from the right and left side, which means the limit of $\ln(x)-\ln(x_{0})0$, which means it's continuous.

To prove it's bijectivity, we've already proven it's strictly increasing, which means no repeat values, meaning it's injective.
As the limit to infinity of it is +infinity.
It can be done, I'm just too lazy to write it down. You just need to prove it.

It's also nice because it means it has an inverse.
It's nice because it means we can define stuff next week.

## But first, derivatives

So, we need to prove ln is differentiable from 0 to infinity, as well as that it's derivative is 1/x. 

The proof is as follows:

If we have $x_{0}\in]0+\infty[$ fixed and let  $x \gt x_0$.

From there, we know

$$\begin{split}(x-x_{0}) \frac{1}{x}\lt\ln(x)-\ln(x_0)\lt(x-x_{0}) \frac{1}{x_{0}}\\\implies \frac{1}{x}\lt \frac{\ln(x)-\ln(x_{0})}{x-x_{0}}\lt 1x_{0}\\\implies\text{their limits are greater or equal in that same order.}\\\implies \lim_{x\to x_{0}}\frac{\ln(x)-\ln(x_{0})}{x-x_{0}}=\frac{1}{x_{0}}\end{split}$$

Which means ln'(x) = 1/x.

Ta da.

## Solving (in)equations

The easiest way to go about solving stuff with log in it is by using:

$$\ln(u)=\ln(v)\implies u=v$$

Which also applies to inequalities.

### Example 1

$\ln(1-x)+\ln(x)\le2$

So, let's start by finding the domain of definition. The inside of a log can't be negative, which means here it's from 0 to 1.

Step 2, let's solve it.

$$
\begin{split}
\ln(1-x)+\ln(x)\le2\\
\iff \ln(x(1-x))\le2\\
\iff \ln(x(1-x))\le 2\ln(e)\\
\iff \ln(x(1-x))\le \ln(e^{2})\\
\text{Step 3 - remove the log}\\
\iff x(1-x)\le e^2\\
\iff 0\le x^{2}-x+e^{2}\\\\
\Delta=1-4e^{2}\lt0, \text{ which means this part always greater than 0}\\
0\le x^{2}-x+e^{2}\iff x\in\mathbb{R}\\
\end{split}
$$

Which means the set of solutions is $S=D_{def}\bigcap\mathbb{R}=]0,1[$.

### Example 2

Let\s find the area of D, defined by the curves $y= \frac{x+1}{x}$, $y=0$, $x=1$, and $x=2$.

Which is to say the area under the curve $y= \frac{x+1}{x}$ from 1 to 2. 

We can note that this curve is the same as $1+ \frac{1}{x}$.

This means we can solbe this to be the area of $1\times(2-1)$, which is the area added by the 1, and $\ln(2)-\ln(1)$, which is just $\ln(2)$. This means the area is $1+\ln(2)$.

[[9. Derivatives of trigonometric functions|Previous]]
