
## Definition
A vector is $\vec{v}$ is defined by two things: 
- it's direction (where it's pointing)
- It's norm (how long it is)

>[!note]- Historical note
>Vectors come to math from physics, particularly mechanics, where they are often used to represent things like forces and acceleration. In math they were mainly used in geometry, for stuff like translations and other transformations.


## Operations

### Additions

To add two vectors, we do the following:

$\vec{c}=\vec{a}+\vec{b}$

a + b, if we build them in a plane, will result in a parallelogram like shape, whose diagonal is c.

The other way is to "put one at the tip of the other", if you can visualize that (photos are hard)
That's the rule of the polygonal contour.

## Subtraction

$\vec{c}=\vec{a}-\vec{b}$

Is the same as saying

$\vec{c}=\vec{a}+(-\vec{b})$

$-\vec{b}$ is the same as flipping it's direction.

Another way to define it is that $\vec{AB} + \vec{BA}=\vec{0}$ (with $\vec{0}$ being a vector of length of 0).
So vector from point A to point B + the vector from point B to point A, it will become 0.

This allows us to easily do vector subtraction.

### Chasles' relation (Segment addition postulate)

This tells us that that if we are given the points A, B, as well as a point M elsewhere, 

$\vec{AB}=\vec{AM}+\vec{MB}$

This is a direct result of the rule of the polygonal contour.


## Scalar multiplication

(as a reminder, a scalar is a real number)

The multiplication of vector by a number will cause it's norm to be multiplied by the scalar.

So, if we define $\vec{b}=\vec{a}*n$

Depending on the value of n...

If $n\gt0$, $\vec{b}$ and $\vec{a}$ will point in the same direction, however $\vec b$ will be n times longer than $\vec a$.

If $n\lt0$, $\vec b$ will point in the opposite direction of $\vec a$, and will be n times longer.

If $n = 0$, $\vec{b} = \vec{0}$

### Linear combinations

Say we have the vectors $\vec{u}$ and $\vec{v}$, as well as $\alpha, \beta \in \mathbb{R}$:

$\alpha\vec{u}+\beta\vec{v}$ is the linear combination of $\vec{u}$ and $\vec{v}$.

### Collinearity

Two vectors are collinear if their direction is the same or flipped.

In other terms,

$\vec{a}$ and $\vec{b}$ are collinear if ($\exists n\in\mathbb{R}, \vec{a}*n=\vec{b}$).

Also, if $\vec{u} = \vec{0}$, then all vectors are collinear to it (as $\vec{v}*0=\vec{0}$, regardless of the value of $\vec{v}$)


A use for this is if we have two parallel lines (AB) and (CD) $\Rightarrow \vec{AB}$ and $\vec{CD}$ are collinear.
Or if we have 3 points A, B, and C, if $\vec{AB}$ and $\vec{BC}$ are collinear, then (AB) and (BC) are a single line.

### Proposition

If we have 2 vectors ($\vec{u}$ and $\vec{v}$), that aren't collinear, then any vector of $\vec{w}$ can be decomposed into $\vec{w}=\alpha\vec{u}+\beta\vec{v} (\alpha,\beta\in\mathbb{R}$.

Proof:

If $\alpha\vec{u}$ and $\beta\vec{v}$ aren't pointing in the same direction, it is possible to make any w appear as the diagonal the parallelogram whose sides they represent.

In other terms, you can decompose a vector into any other two non-collinear vectors.

### Some more properties

1. $\vec{0}+\vec{u}=\vec{u}+\vec{0}=\vec{u}$
2. $1\vec{u}=\vec{u}$
3. vector addition is commutative, in the sense that $\vec{u}+\vec{v}=\vec{v}+\vec{u}$
4. $\alpha(\vec{u}+\vec{v})=\alpha\vec{u}+\alpha\vec{v}$
5. $\vec{u}(\alpha+\beta)=\alpha\vec{u}+\beta\vec{u}$
6. $\alpha(\beta\vec{u})=(\alpha\beta)\vec{u}$

