
## What is a scalar product

The scalar product, also called the dot product, of two vectors can be found in a number of ways. The simplest to understand what is represents is

$$
\vec{v}\cdot\vec{u}=||\vec{v}||*||\vec{u}||*\cos(\theta)
$$

With $||\vec{u}||$ being the norm of $\vec{u}$, and $\theta$ being their difference in angles (remember, a vector can be defined as $\vec{u}=(||\vec{u}||, \alpha)$ in the polar notation, meaning it points $||\vec{u}||$ units in $\alpha$ direction from the origin on the x axis).

The scalar product is essentially a way to find how close to each other the vectors are pointing. The closer, the closer the result will be to just the product of their norms, the further, the closer to the negative of the product of their norms.

This allows for some fun properties

### Fun properties

1. $\vec{u}\cdot\vec{v}\gt0 \iff 0\le\theta\le\frac{\pi}{2}$
2. $\vec{u}\cdot\vec{v}\lt0\iff\frac{\pi}{2}\le\theta\le\pi$
3. $\vec{u}\cdot\vec{v}\iff\theta=\frac{\pi}{2}$

Why? because:
1. The magnitude / norm of two vectors is always positive, if it's negative it's just pointing in the opposite direction, so just add $\pi$ to the angle and remove the -
2. cos ranges between -1 and 1 (see [[2. Trigonometric functions#Sine and Cosine|Sine and cosine in trig]])

This means, if the vectors are perpendicular, their dot product is 0.

## Absolute value of the scalar product

$$
\begin{aligned}
|\vec{u}*\vec{v}|=|||\vec{u}||*||\vec{v}||*\cos(\theta)|\\
\implies|\vec{u}*\vec{v}|=||\vec{u}||*||\vec{v}||*|\cos(\theta)|
\end{aligned}
$$

This will allow us to say that $||\vec{u}||*||\vec{v}||=|\vec{u}\cdot\vec{v}|$ if and only if both vectors are collinear.


## Orthogonal projection

for a fixed non-null vector $\vec{u}$, for any vector $\vec{v}$, we can define a projection of $\vec{v}$ on $\vec{u}$, called $P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}$.

This projection is a bit hard to define without drawing, and drawing on a computer is hard.

It has however some fun properties:

1. $P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}$ is collinear to $\vec{u}$, as it's $\vec{v}$ projected onto $\vec{u}$.
2. $\vec{v}-P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}$ is orthogonal to $\vec{u}$.

Some additional observations:

1. $P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}$ is $\vec{0}$ if $\vec{v}$ and $\vec{u}$ are orthogonal.
2. $P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}=\vec{v}$ if $\vec{v}$ and $\vec{u}$ are collinear.
3. $P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}$ only really depends on the direction of $\vec{u}$

So, we define the formula to be:

$$P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}=\frac{\vec{v}\cdot\vec{u}}{||\vec{u}||^2}\vec{u}$$

Why?

Well, first we need the answer to be a vector. The formula here is one, as while we have a scalar product divided by the square of the magnitude, it is multiplied by a vector.

To then finish this, we need to show both vectors are the same, by first looking at the magnitude, and then the direction.

### Magnitude

From our definition, we find...

$P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}=||\vec{v}||*\cos{\theta}$ if it's acute,
$P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}=||\vec{v}||*\cos(\pi-\theta)$ if it's obtuse,

In other terms, it's $P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}=||\vec{v}||*|\cos(\theta)|$.

For our formula:

$\frac{\vec{v}\cdot\vec{u}}{||\vec{u}||^2}\vec{u}$ it can be simplified through some steps you should probably figure out $\frac{|\vec{v}*\vec{u}|}{||\vec{u}||}$, which can be turned into $\frac{\vec{u}*\vec{v}*\cos{\theta}}{||\vec{u}||}$, which is $||\vec{v}||*|\cos(\theta|)$

### Direction

As for it's direction, as we're multiplying by $\vec{u}$, it's going to be pointing in the direction of $\vec{u}$, which is if you remember collinear to the projection of $\vec{v}$ on to $\vec u$. 

### Some more consequences

The first (and best) consequence of our formula is that if $||\vec{u}||$ is 1 (so $\vec{u}$ is a unit vector), we get that the formula becomes $(\vec{u}\cdot\vec{v})*\vec{u}$. This is neat because it reduces the math needed. 

We can also turn this into the full formula, but as the full formula is fairly easy to remember, do I need to write how?

If we multiply the projected vector by a number n, the projection will be n times longer.

The projection of a sum of vectors will be the sum of their projections

## Back to scalar products

So, why are dot products useful?

As mentioned briefly before, one of the main uses of the scalar product is seeing their orthogonality with each other.

If we were to represent every vector $\vec{v}$ that with a $\vec{u}$ would have  a dot product of 0, it'd be every vector orthogonal to it.

If we were to represent every vector $\vec{v}$ that with a $\vec{u}$ would have  a dot product of 1, assuming $\vec{u}$ has a magnitude of 1, it would be vectors whose projection on $\vec{u}$ would have a magnitude of $\frac{1}{2}$.


Some more stuff:
1. $\vec{v}\cdot\vec{u}=\vec{u}\cdot\vec{v}$ (symmetry)
2. $(\alpha\vec{u}+\beta\vec{v})\cdot\vec{w}=\alpha\vec{u}\cdot\vec{w}+\beta\vec{v}\cdot\vec{w}$ (bilinearity)
3. $\vec{u}\cdot(\alpha\vec{v}*\beta\vec{w})=\alpha\vec{u}\cdot\vec{w}+\beta\vec{u}\cdot\vec{w}$ (bilinearity)

1 is easy to prove, as it's by definition

Also, 2 and 3 are equivalent because of that, so we need to only prove 1.

3 is proven in two steps:

geometrically, we know $P_{\vec{v}+\vec{u}}\vec{u}=P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}+P_{\vec{v}}\vec{u}$

This can be turned into $(\vec{v}+\vec{w})\cdot\vec{u}=\vec{v}\cdot\vec{u}+\vec{w}\cdot\vec{u}$.

## Example

Say we have a prism of side length of 3, with a equilateral triangle base of length 1 ABCDEF.

With ABC being one triangle, and DEF the other.

We need to find $\vec{AE} \cdot \vec{AF}$, and from it find the angle $\widehat{EAF}$

To do so, we can use linear combinations to turn this into:

$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
\vec{AE}\cdot\vec{AF}\\=(\vec{AB}+\vec{BE})\cdot(\vec{AC}+\vec{CF})\\
=\vec{AB}\cdot\vec{AC}+\vec{AB}\cdot\vec{CF}+\vec{BE}\cdot\vec{CF}+\vec{BE}\cdot\vec{CF}\\
=\frac{1}{2}+0+0+9\\
=\frac{19}{2}
\end{split}
\end{equation}
$$


From there, we can also find
$||\vec{AE}||=||\vec{AF}||\sqrt{10}, \cos(\widehat{EAF}) = \cfrac{\vec{AE}\cdot\vec{AF}}{||\vec{AE}||*||\vec{AF}||}=\cfrac{19}{20}$

Which means we need to find $\cos^{-1}(\frac{19}{20}\approx18.2\degree)$

[[1. Vector|Previous]]
[[3. Vector study of straight lines|Next]]
