
## Lines going through the origin

If we get an frame $R=(0,\vec{i},\vec{j})$, if we have an $a,b\in\mathbb{R}$ with (a,b)$\ne$(0,0), for any $M(x,y)$, we have $ax+by=0$, which means:

if R is orthonormal, $\vec{OM}\cdot\vec{n}=0$ at $\vec{n}\binom{a}{b}$.

If R is any other reference, $\vec{OM}$ and $\vec{u}$ are colinear if $\vec{u}=\binom{-b}{a}$, so the determinant of $\begin{vmatrix}x&-b\\ y&a\end{vmatrix}$ = ax+by=0.

Geometrically, this equation describes a line. 

If R is direct orthonormal, putting the equation in reduced form allows us to find the angle of inclination theta, which is it's slope, in the reference to the abscissa. 

the reduced form is $d: y= \frac{-a}{b}x=mx$, where m is the slope.

if b is 0, the slope is infinite. If a is 0, the slope is 0, and this a horizontal line.

## Any line

Using the same notations as in [[#Lines going through the origin|before]], we can give ourselves another number $c\in\mathbb{R}$.

We thus can define: $ax+by=c$. This allows us to offset the line vertically.

If we were to find a line going through some point $A(x_{a},y_{a})$:

$ax+bx=ax_{a}+by_{a}\iff a(x-x_{a})+b(y-y_{a})=0$

For an orthonormal frame, we can turn this into:

$\vec{AM}\cdot\vec{n}=0$ where $\vec{OM}\cdot\vec{n}=c$ we get $a\vec{n}\binom{a}{b}$

As for any R, $\vec{AM},\vec{u}$  are colinear where $\vec{u}\binom{-b}{a}$


Geometrically, this also describes a line, parallel to the one in paragraph one, but offset vertically by c at every point. 

This means that for any vector $\vec{v}\binom{\alpha}{\beta}$ colinear to $\vec{u}\binom{-b}{a}$, d can defined as 

$$d:\begin{cases}x=x_{a} +\alpha t\\\\t=t_{a}+\beta t\end{cases},t\in\mathbb{R}$$

To summarize, we have the Cartesian equation, $ax+by=c$, as well as $(x_{a},y_{a}),ax_{a}+by_{a}=c$, with the director vector $\binom{-b}{a}$, and $a\alpha+b\beta=0$, which also gives us the solutions to the homogeneous equation. 

The parametric equations are:

$$
\begin{cases}
 x=x_{a}+\alpha t\\
 \\
y=y_{a}+\beta t
\end{cases}, t\in\mathbb{R}
$$

In the case where R is orthonormal, if we calculate the projection $P_{\vec{n}}(\vec{AM})$, we get:

$$\frac{\vec{AM}\cdot\vec{n}}{||n||^{2}}\vec{n^2}=\frac{a(x-x_{a})+b(y-y_{a})}{a^{2}+b^{2}}=\frac{ax+by-c}{a^{2}+b^{2}}\vec{n}$$


Some more stuff:

$\binom{a}{b}$
$\delta=\cfrac{|ax+by-c|}{\sqrt{a^{2}+b^{2}}}=||P_{\vec{n}}(\vec{AM})||$
if ax+by > c, M is in the half-plane where $\vec{n}$ is pointing
if ax+by \< c, M is in the half-plane where $-\vec{n}$ is pointing

## Examples

### Ex 1

We have A(2, 0), and B(3, 4). Find the Cartesian equation of d=(AB), an the line g parallel to it passing through the origin.

To solve it:

we have: O(0,0), A(2,0), B(3,4).

First, we should find $\vec{AB}$, as it's d's director vector. It's $\binom{1}{4}$

From this, we get $d:4x-y=8$.

As we know that c is just the constant which dictates the offset from the origin, we can simply say that the one passing through the origin is $g:4x0y=0$

A little addition: if R is direct orthonormal, to calculate the angle in relation to the horizontal, it's $tan(\theta)=4$ which is $\theta\approx76^{\circ}$.


Another solution:

$$d:\begin{vmatrix}x-2&1 \\ y&4\end{vmatrix}=0=4x-y-8$$
Last solution: 

$$d:\begin{cases}x=2+t\\ x=4t\end{cases},t\in\mathbb{R}\implies4x-y=8$$

### Ex 2

The line d is described by $3x-4y=12$.


We can easily find it passes through (4,0), (0,-3), and (8,3).

We can also find it's directed by $\binom{4}{3}$.

It's got a whole bunch of other descriptions I can't be bothered writing out. Yeah this isn't a well defined exercise, sorry.

