> I am escaping to the one place that hasn't been corrupted by capitalism... Space!!
> Tim Curry, in his career defining role as Premier Cherdenko of the Soviet Union, in the game Command and Conquer: Red Alert 3


## Points and vectors

We've previously talked in [[3. Vector study of straight lines|chapter 3]] about coordinates and R, a plane.

What if we add  another coordinate to our vectors?
We get a space.

We have therefore the exact same stuff as before, but slightly different because there's one more dimension to work with.

For example, to be colinear, we now define that vectors need to be proportional (so for vectors $\vec{u} \text{ and } \vec{v}$ respectively $\begin{bmatrix}\alpha\\ \beta\\ \gamma\end{bmatrix}$ and $\begin{bmatrix}x\\y\\z\end{bmatrix}$, if $\frac{x}{\alpha}=\frac{y}{\beta}=\frac{z}{\gamma}(=t)$, then they are proportional.)

We'll also see that to have two vectors be colinear, is the same as to say:

$\begin{vmatrix}x&\alpha\\ y&\beta\end{vmatrix}=0, \begin{vmatrix}x&\alpha \\ z&\gamma\end{vmatrix}=0, \begin{vmatrix}y&\beta\\ z&\gamma\end{vmatrix}=0$

which we'll later find out means

$\begin{vmatrix}x&\alpha\\ y&\beta\\ z&\gamma\end{vmatrix}=0$


Anyhow, if we have two vectors that aren't colinear, we can define other vectors as their linear combination. The vectors defined that way are co-planar to them, written $\vec{w}\in vect(\vec{u},\vec{v})$.

You can fairly easily define that with vectors u and v, we can define variables s and t, so that $\vec{w}=s\vec{u}+t\vec{v}$. From there, you can without major issues rewrite that using columns, and from there turn it into a form that looks something like $ax+by+cz=d$, where $a,b,c,d\in\mathbb{R}$. This is useful, as it defines a plane in 3d space (note how similar it is to a line in 2d space). [Mildly cool visualization](https://www.desmos.com/3d/rjedwu8es3).

You can check if a vector is part of that plane by plugging it's x y and z coordinates into the resulting formula.

We'll also soon discover that is the Cartesian formula of a plane.

In a reciprocal way, if we have $\vec{w}$, solution to that formula. If we know the normal vector of the plane, to check if the vector is part of it, we can just check if $\vec{w}\cdot\vec{n}=0$.


Lastly, we need to know, if $\vec{w}=(x,y,z)$:

$$\det_{R}(\vec{u},\vec{v},\vec{w})=\begin{vmatrix}\alpha& \lambda& x \\ \beta& \mu& y\\ \gamma& \sigma & z\end{vmatrix}= \begin{vmatrix}\beta& \mu \\ \gamma & \sigma \end{vmatrix}~x- \begin{vmatrix}\alpha & \lambda \\ \gamma& \sigma\end{vmatrix}~y+\begin{vmatrix}\alpha & \lambda \\ \beta & \mu\end{vmatrix}z$$


## Lines

A line is defined using basically the same thing as before, just with one additional parameter.

$$$d:\begin{cases}x=x_{a}+\alpha t\\ y= y_{a}+\beta t\\ z=z_{a}+\gamma t\end{cases}, t\in\mathbb{R}$$

This also allows for a nice thing, called the Cartesian equations of d, which we get by removing t.


$$
d: \frac{x-x_{a}}{\alpha}= \frac{y-y_{a}}{\beta}= \frac{z-z_{a}}{\gamma}(=t)
$$

This of course requires alpha beta and gamma to not be 0. If one of them is 0, we consider that $x=x_{a}$ (or equivalent).

If there's $\alpha=\beta$ (or equivalent cases), we can write that $x=x_{a},~ y=y_{a}$
To describe a line, we need 2 equations. Unless it's a parametric equation.

A simple example would be

$$
d: \begin{cases}x=2+3t\\ y=1-t\\ z=t\end{cases}
$$

We immediately know it passes through $(2,1,0)$, and it's directed by $\begin{bmatrix}3\\-1\\1\end{bmatrix}$.

It admits as carthesian equation an infinite number of solutions, but the basic one is

$$
d: \frac{x-2}{3}=1-y= \frac{z}{2}
$$



Lastly, is we get a line $d=(AB)$, with $A=(1,5,5), b=(-1,5,1)$

We get that $\vec{AB}=(-2,0,-4)$, or technically $\vec{u}=(1,0,2)$, is director to d.

We can thus get:

$$
d:\begin{cases}x=1+t\\ y=5\\ z=5+2t\end{cases}
$$

This means for the Cartesian equation, we have

$$
d: x-1, \frac{z-5}{2}, \text{ and } y=5
$$

And this means that in the y coordinate, this line is always parallel to $(Oxz)$ (that is to say, parallel to the plane that doesn't contain y).

There, we have the interesting cases of where d intersects (Oxy), and (Ozy). It'll however never intersect (Oxz).

## Planes

Let a, b, c, d be reals, with (a,b,c) not (0,0,0).
For any M(x,y,z) we thus have $ax+by+cz=d$.

If we have a $A(x_{a},y_{a},z_{a})$, which is a solution for the previous equation, means point A is part of the plane represented by M(x, y, z).

This means we have $ax+by+cz=ax_{a}+by_{a}+cz_{a}$, because the second half is also equal to d.

We can turn it into the form $a(x-x_{a})+b(y-y_{a})+c(z-z_{a})=0$, which means $\vec{AM}$ checks out $ax+by+cz=0$. 

This also means we have more stuff.

We can have any frame of reference R, on which every element will be a linear combination of 2 non-colinear vectors, that fulfill $ax+by+c=0$.
In the case R is orthonormal, we also have $\vec{AM}\cdot\vec{n}=0$, and $\vec{n}=\begin{bmatrix}a\\b\\c\end{bmatrix}$.

All that to say, any plane will be a vector plane represented by some vectors, all normal to (a,b,c), that underwent a translation so that the value at 0 would be d instead. 

In other terms, $ax+by+cz=0$ solves for the vector plane as in where it is and how it's rotated, $ax+vy+cz=d$ solves it's location.

This is the cathesian equation of the plane $\pi$.

We can find it's director vector $(\alpha, \beta, \gamma),a\alpha+b\beta+c\gamma=0$.

There are technically infinitely many director vectors, but the trivial ones to find are $(b, -a, 0), (c, 0, -a), (0, c, -b)$.

Next, we can create it's parametric equations:

$$
\vec{AM}=s\vec{u}+t\vec{v}: \begin{cases}x=a_{a}+\alpha s+\lambda t\\y= y_{a}+\beta s+ \mu t\\z= z_{a}+\gamma s + \sigma t\end{cases}
$$

That's nice, because we just need one point and the director vectors u and v.

Now, id R is orthonormal...

$(a,b,c)$ is normal to the plane.

>[!note]- for the programmers
>This is actually a really important thing in computer graphics, if you've ever seen a normal map this is one of the main reasons they are used. They just store every normal vector of some texture as a color.

We can also easily find the distance between some point M and our plane pi.

$$
\delta=\frac{|ax+by+cz-d|}{\sqrt{a^{2}+b^{2}+c^{2}}}
$$

Essentially, we project M onto the normal, and find it's length.

### Examples

Let's have the plane $2x+y-z=3$. 

...It passes through $(1,1,0),(1,0,-1),(0,0,-3),(1,2,)$
... It is directed by the vectors... $(1, 1, 3), (0,1,1), (1,-2,0)$
(these are the solutions of 2x+y-z=0)

If R is orthonormal...
The distance between (0,0,0) and our plane:

$$\frac{|2*0+0-0-3|}{\sqrt{2^{2}+1^{2}+(-1)^{2}}}= \frac{3}{\sqrt{6}}=\sqrt{\frac{3}{2}}$$


Let's have another plane. We don't know it, but we know it's characteristics:

It's defined by $A(1,1,1), \vec{u}(1,-1,0)$ and $\vec{v}(1,0,-1)$

Well, we can define pi to be

$$\begin{vmatrix}1&1&x\\-1&0&y\\0&-1&z\end{vmatrix}=\begin{vmatrix}-1&0\\0&-1\end{vmatrix}x-\begin{vmatrix}1&1\\0&-1\end{vmatrix}y+\begin{vmatrix}1&1\\-1&0\end{vmatrix}z=x+y+z=3$$

Which gives us the carthesian equations.

$$
\pi:\begin{cases}x=1+s+t\\y=1-s\\z=1-t\end{cases}\implies \begin{cases}x+y=2+t\\z=1-t\end{cases}\implies x+y+z=3
$$

## Relative positions

So, things can be positioned somewhere.

Where are they positioned relative to each other and how to find that?

Let's proceed by examples.


What is the relative position of the lines

$$
d: \begin{cases}x=8+4t\\ y=1+t\\ z=-6-2t\end{cases}~~~~g:\begin{cases}x=-3+2t\\ y=- \frac{3}{2}+3t\\ z= \frac{5}{2}+t\end{cases}
$$

If we look at the director vectors, they look in completely unrelated places, meaning they aren't // or confounded.
The question is if there's an intersection.

Let's solve

$$
\begin{cases}8+3t=-3+2s\\1+t= -\frac{3}{2}+ 3s\\ -6-2t = \frac{5}{2}+s\end{cases}\iff\begin{cases}20+7t=-8+0\\19+7t=-9\\ s=- \frac{17}{2}-2t\end{cases}\iff \begin{cases}t=-4\\ s=- \frac{1}{2}\end{cases}
$$

Meaning there's an intersection.


Let's solve and geometrically interpret

$$\begin{cases}x-y+z=5\\ 2x-y-z=10\end{cases}$$

Both are planes, so it's an intersection between two planes, which i a line.

We can transform it a bit, and turn this into

$$
\begin{cases} x=5+2t \\ y=3t\\z=t\end{cases}
$$

From there, we can find that this is simply  $(5,0,0)+t(2,3,1)$.
It's the line passing through (5,0,0) directed by (2,3,1).

Lastly, in a space with R, let:

A(-1,1,2)
$d: \frac{x-6}{2}=z+2,y=1$
$g:\begin{cases}x=1+k\\ y=2+t\\ z=t\end{cases}$

We need to find a line parallel to (OA), that intersects d and g.

First condition means that l is directed by $\vec{u}=(-1,1,2)$.

It satisfies the second condition (intersect d) if it's in the plane formed by d and $\vec{u}$.

We need to find

$$\begin{vmatrix}-1&2&x\\1&0&y\\2&1&z\end{vmatrix}=x+5y-2z=15$$

as we evaluate at B(6,1,-2).

As our line also has to satisfy the last condition, it must pass by the intersection of the plane we just defined and g.

So, we plug in:

$$
\begin{split}
(1+t)+5(2+t)-2t=11+4t=15\implies  t=1\\
C(2,1,3), \vec{u}=(-1,1,2)
\end{split}
$$

All that to say, it's the line passing through C directed by $\vec{u}$.


[[8. Projections and symmetries|Previous]]
