
First, let's note a small fact. Nobody, and I mean absolutely no one wants to find the derivative at a specific point. It's annoying, tedious, and everything wrong with maths.
It's much easier to find the derivative of the entire function, and then evaluate it at that point.

## Even more examples

### Ex 1

$$\sqrt{1-x^{2}}, x\in[-1,1]$$

So, how do we find this?

Well, we can break it into two functions:

Let's find $x_{0} ~at~ \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}$

$$
\begin{split}
f(x)= \sqrt{x}\\
g(x)= 1-x^{2}
\\
\\
(f\circ g)'(x)= f'(g(x))g'(x)=\frac{-x}{\sqrt{1-x^{2}}}
\end{split}
$$

If we evaluate it at $\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}$, we get $-\sqrt{3}$.
The line at that point is described by $y: \frac{1}{2}-\sqrt{3}(x- \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2})$

### Ex 2

Now, we need to find the set of all lines, tangent to $\sqrt{1-x^{2}}, x\in[-1,1]$, that pass through the point $P=(2,1)$.

The solution is fairly straightforward.

We find that any line tangent to it can be described by:

$$t:y=f(x_{0})+f'(x_{0})(x-x_{0})$$

If we plug in our point...

$$1=f(x_{0})+f'(x_{0})(2-x_{0})$$

So:

$$
\begin{split}
1- \frac{1}{2\sqrt{x^{2}+1}}(2x)\\
\frac{\sqrt{x_{0}^{2}+1}-x_0}{\sqrt{x_{0}^{2}+1}}(2-x_{0})\\
\dots\\
\sqrt{x_{0}^{2}+1}=2x_{0}+1\\
3x_{0}^{2}+4x_{0}=0, \text{with } x_{0}>- \frac{1}{2}\\
\dots\\
\left(x_{0}=0 \text{ or } x_{0}=- \frac{4}{3}\right) \text{ and } x_{0}\ge- \frac{1}{2}\\
x_{0}=0
\end{split}
$$

So, only at 0.

This allows us to find that $t: y=-1+1*x=x-1$

### Ex 3

Say f is defined as $x\to x^{2}$, and we have point P=(6, 3).

We need to find the distance between P and $G_{f}$ (f's graph).

For that, we find the normal of $G_{f}$ that goes through P, that is to say the line perpendicular to the tangent.

The line perpendicular to the tangent is simply the line with 1 divided by the slope as slope. 

So, the solution hasn't exactly changed: $t:y=f(x_{0})+f(x_{0})(x-x_{0})$
The equation of the normal is $n: y= f(x)+ \frac{-1}{f(x_{0})}(x-x_{0})$

If we plug in P:

$$
\begin{split}
3=f(x)+ \frac{-1}{f'(x)}(6-x)\\
f'(x)=2x \text{ <- simple derivative}\\
3=x_{0}^{2}- \frac{1}{2x}(6-x_{0})\\
0=2x^{3}-3x_{0}-6,~~ x_{0}\ne0\\
(x_{0}-2)(2x^{2}+4x_{0}+6), x\ne0\\
\end{split}
$$

The discriminant of the second parenthesis is negative, so the only answer is $x_{0}=2$.

From there, we can find that the point at which this happens is (2, 4).

The distance is simply $$||\vec{TP}||=||\binom{6-2}{3-4}||=||\binom{4}{-1}||=\sqrt{17}$$


### Ex 4

let $f(x)= \frac{2x^{3}-x^{2}-3}{x^{2}+1}$. We also have the line $d: y=2x-1$.

We need to find the intersection of the graph of f and d. In this point, we need to find the geometric angle between them.


>[!note]+
>A good thing for these sorts of situations with derivatives (well, tangents) is that they are so well representative of the graph at the specific point that the angle between the tangents is the same as the angle between the lines.




[[2 - Derivative function and calculation rules|Previous]]
[[3. Continuously differentiable function|Next]]