
## Continuously differentiable function

So, remember how in physics, speed is the derivative of position, with respect to time? and acceleration the derivative of speed with respect to time?

Well, this allows to define the following:

Say f is a function differentiable on the open interval I, and say $x_{0}\in I$. We say f is continuously differentiable at $x_{0}$, if it's derivative function f' is continuous at $x_{0}$.

to be continuously differentiable on I, f needs to be continuously differentiable on $x_{0},\forall x_{0}\in I$.

We call $C^{1}(I)$ the set of all function $f: I\to R$ so that f' is continuously differentiable on I.


### Example 1

If we have $f(x)= \begin{cases} x\in[\frac{1}{2},+\infty[\backslash \{1\} \implies \frac{1-\sqrt{2x-1}}{x-1} \\ x=1\implies -1\end{cases}$.

We want to find if is continuously differentiable at x=1.

This can be done in 3 steps:

1. find f'(x) for all x not 1
2. find f'(1)
3. check if limit of f'(x) at 1 is f'(1)

f'(x) can be after a bit of time found to be something along the lines of

$$
\frac{1}{\sqrt{2x-1}(x+\sqrt{2x-1})}
$$

Next, we need to find f'(1). Unfortunately, that's not very easy, because we need to use Newton for that $f'(1)= \lim_{x\to1} \frac{f(x)-f(1)}{x-1}$. Solving that isn't trivial, but it isn't complex either, so I'm leaving this as an exercise for the reader.

Spoiler: we find it to be $\frac{1}{2}$.

Next, we need to find the limit of the monstrous creation we derived earlier, at 1.

So we need to check $\lim_{x\to1} \frac{1}{\sqrt{2x-1}(x+\sqrt{2x-1})}= \frac{1}{1(1+1)}=\frac{1}{2}$


Which is what we want, and is what we're hoping for.

### Example 2

What if we try the same with:

$$
\begin{cases} 
 x\ne0\implies x^{2}\sin(\frac{1}{x})\\
 x=0\implies0\\
\end{cases}
$$

Same steps, find f', find f'(0), check if limit matches.

We'll quickly find that

$f'(x)=2x\sin(\frac{1}{x})-\cos(\frac{1}{x})$ if x isn't 0, and 0 if it is.


Now, f'(0) doesn't have a limit, as you'd need to find limit of cos(1/x). 

This means that while it's differentiable, it isn't continuous.

## Higher order derivatives

Bored of regular old derivatives? Want to derive some more, but you just can't? Have you tried deriving your derivatives? That's right, you can derive derivatives from derivatives, deriving derivatives you'd have never thought of deriving.

Basically, if an f is differentiable on interval I, and f' is also differentiable on I.

The logical notation would be $(f')'$, but mathematicians are about as laze as physicists (don't tell the teachers I ~~said~~ wrote that), so it's called $f''$. You can then increase the order by: either appending another ', writing it using roman numerals (if you're a boomer), of by writing $f^{(n)}$, where n is the order of the derivative[^1]

We note $C^{n}(I)$ the set of all functions n times differentiable while remaining continuous. 

We note $C^{\infty}(I)$ if it can be derived indefinitely. This applies to most(?) polynomials, and and trigonometric functions.

[[2.2 - Further continuation|Previous]]


[^1]:Sick name for a band
