
## Basic meaning

An application of a set is, when we have 2 sets, E and F, as well as a way to go from one to the other.

$$
f:E\rightarrow F,\ \  x=f(x)
$$

Essentially, this will assign to every element $x\in E$ it's image $f(x)$ by f.

If you want, this takes every element in set one, and says which element in set two results from it.

There is also the idea of antecedent, which is the element(s) in set one to which a specific element of set two is assigned.

in other terms: $f^{-1}({y})\{x\in E\mid f(x) =y$

> [!warning]+ Beware!
> While it has a $^{-1}$ in it, that doesn't necessarily mean it can be reversed.
> 
> Take for example squaring. If we have a 4, it doesn't mean we're starting from 2, as it can also be -2. If however we have say a negative number, as squaring returns a positive number, $f^{-1}(-1)=\emptyset$.
> 
> Typically, $f^{-1}(\{f(x)\})\ne\{x\}$

Basically, you have the set of antecedents (sometimes named pre-images), which maps to the set of images.


## Example

a)

$E=F=\{\alpha;\beta;\gamma\}$

say $f(\alpha)=\beta;\ f(\beta)=\alpha;\ f(\gamma)=\alpha$

This means:

$f^{-1}(\alpha)=\{\beta;\ \gamma\}$
$f^{-1}(\gamma)=\{x\in E\mid f(x)=\gamma\}=\emptyset$
$f^{-1}(\beta)=\{\alpha\}$

b)

E=F=$\mathbb{R}$         $f(x)=x^2-5x+6$

what is $f^{-1}({y})$ for any $y\in\mathbb{R}$?

Well, it's going to be the solutions of the parabola here. We therefore know that at the minimum, we'll have a single value, above it, we have 2 values, and below it $\emptyset$.

Well, we don't exactly want to calculate that for every value, as we have an infinite number of values.

So, we solve the equation:

$$
\Delta=(-5)^2-4(6-y)=1+4y
$$

This tells us:

$$
\begin{cases}
y< -\frac{1}{4}\implies \emptyset \\
y= -\frac{1}{4} \implies\{ \frac{5}{2}\} \\
y>- \frac{1}{4}\implies \{ \frac{5-\sqrt{1+4y}}{2};\ \frac{5+\sqrt{1+4y}}{2}\}
\end{cases}
$$

## Direct linking

Say we have $A\subset E$

We note:

$$f(A)=\{f(x)|x\in A\}$$

This is a so called direct image. We directly go from an element to the resulting set.

Now, in E, we have elements that are not in $f(A)$. 

If we have any of the antecedents of some element if $f^{-1}(A)$, it'll be in $f(A)$. In other terms, $f(A)= \{f(x)|x\in A\} =\{y\in F|\exists x\in A, y=f(x)\}$

We can also refer to $f(a)$ as $imf$ (as in image f).

$f(A)$ is a subset of F, which is the image set of E.

If A = E, then $f(A) = f(E) = F$. 


Also $C_{F}imf=\{y\in E|f^{-1}=\emptyset\}$


In the case where $E = F = \mathbb{R}$     $f:x\rightarrow x^{2}-5x+6$

Will result in 

$f(\mathbb{R})=\{f(x)|x\in\mathbb{R}\}=[- \frac{1}{4};+\infty[$

now, if we run this on a limited range...

$f([2;4])=\{f(x)|x\in[2;4]\}=[-\frac{1}{4}; 2]$

(that last part is determined by the formula, I'm using the previous one. You just calculate where it starts and where it ends (so $\ne [f(2);f(4)]$, but the min in the range and the max in the range)).


Lastly, does $f(x)\in f(A) \implies x\in A$?

We answer no, as multiple things in the initial set can map to the resulting element in a set.
In other terms, if we have something like {-2;2;3} as E, and {2;3} as A, and f(A) is {4;9}, while f(-2) is 4, -2 is not in A.

## Inverse image

Same sets as before, with additional $B\subset F$

We can say the following:

$$
f^{-1}(B)=\bigcup_{y\in B}f^{-1}(\{f(y)\})=\{x\in E|f(x)\in B\}
$$

Example:

$B=F\implies f^{-1}(B)=E$

$C\in C_{F}imf \implies f^{-1}(B)=\emptyset$

[[2. Operating on sets|Previous Chapter]]
