
So you know how lists take in a number, and return some predefined value?

Dictionaries do the same, except instead of a number it can be anything[^1].


A dictionary is made up of key-value pairs. 


Dictionaries are also mutable, indexable, and what not.

This all means you can create read insert and whatever else a dictionary.


To create one: `d = {}`.

A non empty one: `d = {'k':'v', 'k2': 'v2, 'kn': 'vn'}`

Some restrictions: 

1. Keys can't be mutable.
2. Keys can't repeat, must be unique. 

Often times we use strings as keys in dictionaries, however again, it can be anything immutable. It can be a string, it can be a number, it can be a tuple, and even a boolean.


The easiest way to access a value from a dictionary is to use indexing.

So:

```python
d = {1 : 4, 2: 3}
print(d[1])
```
```markdown
4
```

However, it throws (raises) an error if you try to access something that doesn't exist.

If you want to access something you're not sure exists, you can use `d.get(key)`, which if the key isn't in the dictionary will return `None`.

Using indexing, you can also modify and extend dictionaries.

```python
d = {'key1': 'val1'}

d['key1'] = 'other val'
d['key2'] = 'another val'

print(d)
```
```mardown
{'key1': 'other val', 'key2': 'another val'}
```

Anyhow, you can also iterate on a dictionary, which'll return the various keys, and you can use the keys to access the values.

If you instead use:

- `d.keys()` - you can iterate on the keys
- `d.values()` - you can iterate on the values
- `d.items()` - you can iterate in the key-value pairs themselves, as tuples.

Much like list comprehension, there's also dictionary comprehension. It's the same thing.

It's rarely used, because often making a function is easier.

You can also put dictionaries in dictionaries, but it's rarely useful.

[[2. Lists|Previous]]

[^1]:terms and conditions apply
