
This is a simple and quite effective model to describe any real gas that's far away from liquefaction.

So, our hypothesis are:
1. The different molecules don't interact.
2. The molecules don't have a volume (we suppose they are points)
3. Every choc with a molecule is perfectly elastic (with other molecules, with pistons, any containers...)

What does this get us?

Well, the law of perfect gas states $PV=NkT$, where P is the pressure of the gas, V the volume it occupies, N the **number of molecules**, T the temperature of the gas (in degrees **K**), as well as k, the Boltzmann constant, which is roughly $1.38\cdot10^{-23} JK^{-1}$

Another way of writing it, which is perfectly equivalent and easier to use in stuff like chemistry is $PV=nRT$. It works because $nR=Nk$, because n is a mole (a number) of molecules. In other terms, $N=nN_{A}$. $PV=nN_{a}kT$, and $N_{a}k$ is nice, because it is defined as the constant R, which is the ideal gas constant, which is also $8.31 \frac{J}{K\cdot mol} (JK^{-1}mol^{-1})$. 

## A brief note on temperature

There are many ways to measure temperature. One of them, which is objectively bad for science, is Fahrenheit. It's essentially "on a scale from 1 to 100, how hot is it outside".

A much better one for science is Celsius, which is essentially the same thing, but instead of asking (unreliable) humans, you ask water. It's nice, useful, and reliable.

An even better one is Kelvin, which is also the same question, but instead of asking humans or water, you ask atoms, and set 0 to be the minimum possible temperature, a temperature at which the atoms themselves stop moving.

The scale however is essentially the same as with water.

From there, we can establish that to convert from C to K, we can simply subtract 273.15. The opposite operation would be to simply add 273.15. 
0K is -273.15C, and 0C is 273.15K.

So long as you don't have to deal with Americans talking about "hurr durr Fahrenheit good", this is all very nice, simple and... Why is the entire field of thermodynamics angry?

## Example uses of the law of perfect gases

So, if we have a nice box, let's take one of its sides surface S to be 0.4 $M^2$, its length  L to be 4 $M$, the pressure inside $P_{0}$ to be $10^{5}$ $Pa$, and the temperature inside to be 12$^{\circ}C$.

We add a piston somewhere in the box, splitting the box in 1/4 and 3/4.

Question 1: What's the number of molecules in the box?

Well, using the ideal gas law: $PV=NkT$.
Rearranging to get the stuff we don't the stuff we know: $N=\frac{PV}{kT}\approx \frac{10^{5}*4*0.4}{k*(12+273)}\approx4*10^{25}$

Question 2:  We hear the left side of the box (you know, after the piston), so that $\Delta t=60^{\circ}C$. The piston moves, without friction, and thermally isolates both parts. We thus suppose the temperature in the second part doesn't change.
How much and where does the piston move?

Well, the piston moves until the pressure on both sides is the same, as if the pressure is different, it exerts a force on the piston. So, the real question, where must the piston be for the pressures to be equal?

summarizing some stuff, we can find:

$$d= \frac{3L}{4} \frac{\Delta T}{4 T_{0}+\Delta T}=0.15m$$

## How to find this law

Let's show this law is a consequence of [[2. Newton's second law|Newton's second law]].

Imaging we have a piston, of surface S, that closes a box, of volume V, which contains N molecules.

The gas will exert a force everywhere, including on the piston.

We can also say that, at least at an equilibrium, $\vec{F}_{gas\to piston}=-\vec{F}_{piston\to gas}$, according to newton's 3rd law.

If we look at a single molecule, what's going to happen is that it'll likely have an elastic collision with the piston.

We can calculate that the force this'll apply to the piston to be $\Delta\vec{p}=m\vec{v}'-m\vec{v}=-2mv_{x}\vec{e}_{x}$.

Now, what happens if we consider every single molecule.

Well, during a certain interval of time $\Delta t$, only the closest molecules to it will collide with the piston, at a distance of  $\Delta x=v_{x}\Delta t$. and only if they're moving towards it ($v_{x}\gt0$). 

We'll define $N_{choc}$ to be the number of collisions. It's formula will be $\frac{1}{2}\cdot\frac{N}{V}\cdot S\cdot v_{x}\Delta t$, with $\frac{N}{V}$ being the concentration of the gas's molecules in the volume, $S\cdot v_{x}\Delta t$ the volume of the zone close enough to the piston, 1/2 being needed because only half the molecules will likely collide with the piston, as their direction is random.

This means $\Delta\vec{p}=\Delta p \cdot N_{choc}$. 
Which we can calculate to be $\frac{\Delta\vec{p}}{\Delta t}=- \frac{N}{V}\cdot Smv_{x}^{2}\vec{e}_{x}$.

And according to Newton's 3rd law, $\vec{F}_{gas\to piston}=-\vec{F}_{piston\to gas}$, which means the force the gas applies to the piston to be $\frac{N}{V}\cdot Smv_{x}^{2}\vec{e}_{x}$. 

Which means the gas's pressure P will be $P=\frac{||\vec{F}_{gas\to piston}||}{S}$,which'll be $\frac{N}{V}mv_{x}^{2}$.

however, if we look at $mv^{2}$, that's quite reminiscent of kinetic energy, I wonder if there's a ling.

But first, some small notices.
First of all, pressure is an "average effect".
We can't say that every molecule has the same speed, we should instead use some sort of an average speed.
However, if we do find the average speed, we'll notice that it's actually 0, because again, half the molecules are going in the other direction. That's one of the reasons the square matters.

basically, we're replacing $v_{x}^{2}$ by it's average on all the molecules of the gas. We'll note it $\lt v_{x}^{2}\gt= \frac{1}{N}\sum\limits_{i=1}^{N}v_{i,x}^{2}$
We're assuming that the gas is isotropic, meaning it doesn't have a preferred direction, meaning $\lt v_{x}^{2}\gt=\lt v_{y}^{2}\gt=\lt v_{z}^{2}\gt=\frac{1}{3}\lt v^{2}\gt$

And by Pythagoras, we get $v^{2}=\vec{v}\cdot\vec{v}=v_{x}^{2}+v_{y}^{2}+v_{z}^{2}$.

So, we can rewrite our equation again:

$PV=\frac{1}{3}Nm\lt v^{2}\gt= \frac{2}{3}N\lt\frac{1}{2}mv^{2}\gt=\frac{2}{3}N\lt E_{kin,cm}\gt$

With that last term being the average kinetic energy of the center of mass of a molecule.

We only need one last push to get there...

## The relationship between temperature and kinetic energy

This is also sometimes called the 0th law of Thermodynamics, the equality of temperature.

We consider two objects (molecules) immobile to be at the same temperature, if the average kinetic energy of their center of mass of these objects to be equal.

This allows us to define the absolute temperature to be: The average kinetic energy of a molecule with a null speed ($\lt\vec{v}\gt=\vec{0}$).

Which allows us (well, not us, actual physicists) to find $\lt E_{kin,cm}\gt=\frac{3}{2}kT$, with k being... the Bolzmann constant (physicists don't really like reusing variables).

## Back to finding the law

so, we found $PV=\frac{3}{3}N\lt E_{kin,cm}\gt=NkT$
And so, $PV=NkT$.
And from there $PV=nRT$.


[[1. Compressibility|Next]]
[[1. Macroscopic description of a gas|Previous]]
