---
tags:
  - circle
  - arc
  - sector
---

Angles have a surprisingly large amount of definitions, so here are 3
## Geometric angle
A geometric angle is simply the angle formed between 2 lines. We can then notice then that there are two angles formed like that, one smaller and one larger, which we will call the interior and exterior angle.

Now, how do we define which angle is smaller? We can't measure them yet, we don't know what degrees (or radians) are yet. 

## Orienting angle
Let's go back to out lines, and give them names, d, and e, and say they meet at point P. 

If we have a point A and B, we can find that there is an area delimited by $\widehat{APB}$, which will be covered if we were to move AP over to BP. And it would rotate.
We also need to note and $\widehat{APB}$ is not the same as $\widehat{BPA}$. 

Now, we have a problem, to get AP over BP, we have at least 2, but really an infinite number of ways to do so. 

For some terminology, we talk about different determinations of the same angle when we talk about different ways to get AP over to AB.

Because of this problem we turn to our last, and most important angle:
## Trigonometric angle
A trigonometric angle is a determination of the orienting angle.

It's worth noting that all the determinations of an orienting angle differ only by the number of turns and the direction. The direction is considered positive when we go in the opposite direction of a watch's hands.

## Measuring angles

There are two main ways to measure angles:
- Degrees
- Radians

### Degrees

There is angle that's really easy to define: a full circle.
We define that number assigned to that in degrees 360°.

Why 360, mostly tradition, but it originated in a base 60 system, much like time, which allows us to measure degrees in minutes and seconds:

1$\degree$=60 minutes
1 minute=60seconds.

### Radians

Radians are newer, however they are quite easy to work with once you get used to it, as they work in parts of a circle, with a radius of 1.
This means it's circumference is $2\pi$, which means 1/2 a circle is $\pi$, etc.

This definition allows us to easily find how much of a circle with r=1 is covered, which is quite simple to scale to larger circles.

To convert one to the other it's easy:

$$
\frac{deg}{360}=\frac{rad}{2\pi}
$$

So in other terms, rad to deg is rad\*360/2$\pi$ , and deg to rad is deg\*2$\pi$/360.

## Some notes

Take a trigonometric angle $\alpha$.
$\alpha \in \mathbb{R}$.
$\alpha > 0$ if it's counter clockwise
$\alpha < 0$ if it's clockwise

Take a geometric angle $\beta$
$0\le\beta\le2\pi$ (or 0 and 360)

Two angles are equivalent if $\exists k\in\mathbb{R}, \alpha-\beta=2*\pi*k$
The explanation is just a different number of times circled.

## Circular detour

What goes on in a circle? Well, a whole lot of things, especially if it's a magic circle, but we're talking geometry.
In geometry, two important things that are parts of circles are arcs, and sectors.

Arcs are a part of the circle's circumference, determined by an angle $\alpha$
In a circle of radius r, am the length of said arc is simply $|\alpha[rad]|*r$.

As for a sectors, they are similar, the difference is that instead of being a part of the circumference, it's a part of the area.
It's formula for a circle of size r is $\cfrac{\alpha[rad]*r^2}{2}$

A good exercise is to get these formulas from the following:

the arc of a full circle (2$\pi$) is it's circumference
the sector of a full circle (2$\pi$) is it's area.