
## A quick reminder

First, before we get to trigonometric functions, let's take a detour and remember two theorems:

The Pythagorean Theorem states that in a right triangle, $a^2+b^2=c^2$, where a and b are 'legs', and c the hypotenuse. 

Thales' theorem states that for two similar triangles (as in who's angles are the same), called ABC and AB'C', $\frac{AB}{AB'}=\frac{AC}{AC'}=\frac{BC}{BC'}$.


## Trigonometric circle

Imagine an orthonormal plane. 

On it, we have a circle of side length one, with it's center at it's origin.

It is divided into 4 parts, ordered 1 to 4 (typically written in Latin numerals), starting at the top right, and going in the trigonometric direction.

How do we describe a point that's on the circle?

Well, we can notice a nice correlation, that the point's x and y are correlated in the following way: $x^2+y^2=1$. We know that because of the Pythagorean theorem. 

But this isn't really the best way, as it's 2 variables and that's annoying to deal with.

The better way you can have is an angle (in radians, because of course it's in radians). We define that 0 rad is pointing right. 

From that, $\frac{\pi}{2}$ is looking up, $\pi$ is looking left, and $\frac{3\pi}{4}$ is looking down. $2\pi$ is also looking right, so it's reset.


Because of this, we can also say that for any point P on that circle, we have an angle that points at it.

## Sine and Cosine

Let's say $\alpha$ is an angle and $P(\alpha)$ is the point associated with it. 

The point's x coordinate (it's abscissa) is defined to be the cosine of that angle, and it's y coordinate (it's ordinate) is defined to be the sine.

### Some properties

sin and cos are both functions, so they have some properties.

sin's domain is $\mathbb{R}$, as is cos', however their codomain for both is from -1 to 1( $[-1;1]$ )

If $\beta=\alpha+2k\pi, k\in\mathbb{Z}$, then $P(\alpha)=P(\beta)$ and therefore $\sin(\alpha)=\sin(\beta)$ and $\cos(\alpha)=\cos(\beta)$

In other terms, we can that sine and cosine are **$2\pi$-periodic**

We can also say that $\cos^2(\alpha)+\sin^2(\alpha)=1$

If we briefly go back to the circle's quadrants,

1 means cos > 0, sin > 0
2 means cos < 0, sin > 0
3 means cos < 0, sin < 0
4 means cos > 0, sin < 0


We can also talk about symmetries.

A center symmetry of an angle alpha is equivalent to $\pi+\alpha$, 
It's sin and cos will be -sin and -cos of the original angle.

A Ox symmetry of an angle alpha is the same with -sin
A Oy symmetry of an angle alpha is the same with -cos

## Tangent and cotangent


Let's draw a tangent to our circle, that touches it at point (1;0).

It's going to be a vertical line.

Let's do that again, with point (0;1)

It's going to be a horizontal line.

Now, say we have an angle alpha in our circle, that's in the 1st quadrant.

It's going to intersect both lines, at a points (1; y) for the first one, and point (x; 1) for the second one.

With that, we define the tangent of an angle to be this y, and the cotangent of that angle to be x.


Now, if we look at the case where alpha is $\cfrac{\pi}{2}$, we it never intersects the 1st line, which means $\tan(\frac{\pi}{2})$ is undefined. Same with cot(0).

Also, because of the theorem of Thales, we can say that:

$$
\frac{tan(\alpha)}{sin(\alpha)}=\frac{1}{cos(\alpha)}\implies tan(\alpha)=\frac{sin(\alpha)}{cos(\alpha)}
$$

As well as

$$
\frac{cot(\alpha)}{cos(\alpha)}=\frac{1}{sin(\alpha)}\implies cot(\alpha)=\frac{cos(\alpha)}{sin(\alpha)}
$$

### Some properties

The domain of tan is $\mathbb{R} \backslash \set{\frac{\pi}{2}+k\pi\mid k\in\mathbb{Z}}$

The domain of cot is $\mathbb{R} \backslash \set{k\pi\mid k\in\mathbb{Z}}$

The quadrants also have some helpful things

1st if tan, cot > 0
2nd if tan, cot < 0
3rd if tan, cot > 0
4th if tan, cot < 0


## Right triangles

In right triangles, we have 3 circles, one for each point.

We also assume that we're always in the 1st quadrant. 

Now, because of Thales, we can say the following

$$
\frac{\sin(\beta)}{b}=\frac{1}{c}\implies\sin(\beta)=\frac{b}{c}
$$

In other terms, the opposite side, divided by the hypotenuse.

From here, you've got the logic, you can define the same for cosine, and tan can be defined from them so it's good enough, but you can do it in the same way to get the usual thing.


## Some values to remember

Because they don't want us to use calculators and use our brains instead, it's neat to work with some angles that are surprisingly simple. 


We're going to need a specific shape: an equilateral triangle with each angle being $\frac{\pi}{3}$, and each side being length 1. 

If we draw one's height, it separates it into two right triangles. 

With that, we can define these simplest values:

| .   | $\pi/3$      | $\pi/6$      |
| --- | ------------ | ------------ |
| sin | $\sqrt{3}/2$ | 1/2          |
| cos | 1/2          | $\sqrt{3}/2$ |
| tan | $\sqrt{3}$   | $\sqrt{3}/3$ |
| cot | $\sqrt{3}/3$ | $\sqrt{3}$   |

If we take a square of side 1, if we cut it in half on a diagonal, it'll give us some additional information to use.

| .   | $\pi/4$      | $\pi/2$ | 0   |
| --- | ------------ | ------- | --- |
| sin | $\sqrt{2}/2$ | 1       | 0   |
| cos | $\sqrt{2}/2$ | 0       | 1   |
| tan | 1            | //      | 0   |
| cot | 1            | 0       | //  |

Together, they make the following table:

|     | $\pi/2$ | $\pi/3$      | $\pi/4$      | $\pi/6$      | 0   |
| --- | ------- | ------------ | ------------ | ------------ | --- |
| sin | 1       | $\sqrt{3}/2$ | $\sqrt{2}/2$ | 1/2          | 0   |
| cos | 0       | 1/2          | $\sqrt{2}/2$ | $\sqrt{3}/2$ | 1   |
| tan | //      | $\sqrt{3}$   | 1            | $\sqrt{3}/3$ | 0   |
| cot | 0       | $\sqrt{3}/3$ | 1            | $\sqrt{3}$   | //  |


Take a small example:

We know that tan(x) = $\sqrt{3}$, we also know that $5\pi\le x \le 6\pi$

From tan(x) = $\sqrt{3}$, we know we're either in quadrant 1 or 3 (as $\sqrt 3$ is positive)

From $5\pi\le x \le 6\pi$, we know we're either in quadrant 3 or 4.

Because of this, we know we're in quadrant 3, and sin(x) and cos(x) are less than 0.

From there, we can either use analytical or geometrical ways to find the values, the analytical being to say 

$$
\begin{cases}
sin(x)^2+sin(y)^2 = 1
\\
sin(x)/cos(x) = \sqrt{3}
\\
sin(x), cos(x) \le 0
\end{cases}
$$

And work from there.

alternatively, you can place all those values of a right triangle and work from there.

From here, we can find additional neat/easy to remember angles:

P(0) and P($\frac{\pi}{2}$) are trivial.

We also have the fairly easy to remember values for P($\frac{\pi}{6}$), P($\frac{\pi}{3}$), and P($\frac{\pi}{2}$).

Now, these are useful angles for sure, however, there is additional stuff we can get from there: Their various symmetries.

Let's start with symmetry by Ox:

If we build this on a circle, we can quickly realize, that for cos, that changes nothing, however for sin it's just adding a - in front of it, and same for tan.

As for Oy, it's similar, except for cos being flipped, sin stays, and tan is flipped.

As for center symmetry (by O), it flips both, except for tan which stays

Lastly, there's symmetry by $x=y$, where cosine and sine are inverted, and tan turns into cot.

|     | Ox                          | Oy                             | O                              | x=y                             |
| --- | --------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------------------------ | ------------------------------- |
| sin | $sin(-\alpha)=-sin(\alpha)$ | $sin(\pi-\alpha)=sin(\alpha)$  | $sin(\pi+\alpha)=-sin(\alpha)$ | $sin(\pi/2-\alpha)=cos(\alpha)$ |
| cos | $cos(-\alpha)=\cos(\alpha)$ | $cos(\pi-\alpha)=-cos(\alpha)$ | $cos(\pi+\alpha)=-cos(\alpha)$ | $cos(\pi/2-\alpha)=sin(\alpha)$ |
| tan | $tan(-\alpha)=-tan(\alpha)$ | $tan(\pi-\alpha)=-tan(\alpha)$ | $tan(\pi+\alpha)=tan(\alpha)$  | $tan(\pi/2-\alpha)=cot(\alpha)$ |


[[1. Angles|Previous]]
[[3. Elementary Trig Equations|Next]]