
## Sine

So, what verifies $sin(x) = a$?

First, we need to say that $-1\le a\le 1$, as that's what sine maps to. If that's not the case, there is no solution.

Second, the domain of definition is $\mathbb{R}$.

Then, we find a simple solution ($sin^{-1}(a)$) or one that we know ($\frac{\pi}{6}$...).

Then, we apply symmetry, and periodicity.

Specifically for sin(), we know that $sin(\pi-\alpha)=sin(\alpha)$. The perodicity was written about [[2. Trigonometric functions#Some properties|here]].

From that, we can find the following:

$$
S=\{\alpha+2\pi k, \pi-\alpha+2\pi k|k\in\mathbb{Z}\}
$$

> We won't be mixing this with absolute values, it gets ugly enough really quickly without that anyways...
> *- Prof. Maude Girardin*

### Example

Solve $sin(x)\gt-\frac{1}{2}$.

Well, let's start with $-\frac{1}{2}$ being in the range, which means that there are solutions, but not everything is (as it's an inequality).

If we look at what is = to $-\frac{1}{2}$, it's $-\frac{\pi}{6}$ and $\frac{7\pi}{6}$. That means that everything that's "above" these two points on the circle that is valid. We have a notation for it, that is:

$$S=\bigcup_{k\in\mathbb{Z}}]-\frac{\pi}{6}+2k\pi, \frac{7\pi}{6}+2k\pi[$$
That symbol means union for every k in Z.

## Cosine

What verifies cos(x)=a

First, we need to say that $-1\le a\le 1$, as that's what sine maps to. If that's not the case, there is no solution.

Second, the domain of definition is $\mathbb{R}$.

Sounds familiar? Yeah it's the same as for sine, **except!** that the symmetry is different.

$$
cos(x)=a\iff \begin{cases}x=\alpha+2\pi k\\x=-\alpha+2\pi k\end{cases}
$$



### Example 1

$cos(x) =\sqrt{2}$

Step 1, is $-1\le\sqrt{2}\le1$ ? No? S = $\emptyset$.

### Example 2

for an  $x\in [0; 2\pi[$, solve $cos(2x)=\frac{1}{2}$

We know that $cos(\pi/3)=1/2$

From that, we know that

$$
cos(2x)=1/2\iff
\begin{cases}
2x=\pi/3+2\pi k, k\in \mathbb{Z}\\
2x=-\pi/3+2\pi k, k\in \mathbb{Z}
\end{cases}
$$

$$
\iff
\begin{cases}
x=\pi/6+\pi k, k\in \mathbb{Z}\\
x=-\pi/6+\pi k, k\in \mathbb{Z}
\end{cases}
$$

That is every solution in $\mathbb{R}$.

For solutions between 0 and 2$\pi$, we will find the following:

$S=\{\frac{\pi}{6}; \frac{5\pi}{6}; \frac{7\pi}{6};\frac{11\pi}{6}\}$

### Example 3

Solve $-\frac{1}{2}\le cos(x)<\frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}$ in:

a) $x \in [-\pi, \pi]$
b)$x\in [-3\pi; +\pi]$

So, we have:

$$
cos(y) = -\frac{3} \iff \begin{cases}y=\frac{2\pi}{3}+2\pi k, k\in\mathbb{Z}\\y=-\frac{2\pi}{3}+2\pi k, k\in\mathbb{Z}\end{cases}
$$

$$
cos(y)=\frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}
\iff
\begin{cases}
y=\frac{\pi}{4}+2\pi k, k\in\mathbb{Z}\\
y=-\frac{\pi}{4}+2\pi k, k\in\mathbb{Z}
\end{cases}
$$

If we draw this out on a circle, and figure out the relevant zones where they overlap, we get:

$$
-\frac{1}{2}\le cos(x)\le \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2} \iff 
\begin{cases}
\frac{\pi}{4} +2\pi k \lt x \lt \frac{2\pi}{3}+2\pi k, k\in\mathbb{Z}\\
-\frac{2\pi}{3}+2\pi k \lt x \lt -\frac{\pi}{4}+2\pi k, k\in\mathbb{Z}
\end{cases}
$$

So, if we use that on the given intervals...

a)

$$]\frac{\pi}{4};\frac{2\pi}{3}[\bigcup]-\frac{2\pi}{3}; -\frac{\pi}{4}[$$

b)

$$]-\frac{7\pi}{4};-\frac{4\pi}{3}[\bigcup]-\frac{8\pi}{3}; -\frac{9\pi}{4}[$$



## Tangent and Cotangent

So, tan(x) = a

First of all, $D_{def}=\mathbb{R}\backslash\{\frac{\pi}{2}+2\pi k, k\in\mathbb{Z}\}$

There is a solution for any a in $\mathbb{R}$

If a is a parallel solution, $tan(x)=a\iff x=a+k\pi, k \in \mathbb{Z}$. 

As for cot,

cot(x) = a

$D_{def}$ is the same with a $\frac{\pi}{2}$ offset ($D_{def}=\mathbb{R}\backslash\{\pi k, k\in\mathbb{Z}\}$)

There is a solution for every for every a in R. 

If a is x is a parallel solution, then the general solution is 

$cot(x)=a\iff x=\alpha+k\pi, k\in\mathbb{Z}$



### Example

$tan(2x+\frac{\pi}{3})\ge-\frac{\sqrt{3}}{3},x\in[0,2\pi[$


$D_{def}=\mathbb{R}\backslash\{\frac{\pi}{12}+\frac{\pi k}{2}, k\in\mathbb{Z}\}$


We know that $tan(y) = -\frac{\sqrt{3}}{3}\iff y=-\frac{\pi}{6}+k\pi, k\in \mathbb{Z}$

If we look at a drawing of this, we'll notice that there are going to be 2 intervals where the original thing is correct. This can be turned into:

$-\frac{\pi}{6}+k\pi\le2x+\frac{\pi}{3}\lt\frac{\pi}{2}+k\pi,k\in\mathbb{Z}$

This can be turned into 

$-\frac{\pi}{4}+\frac{k\pi}{2}\le x \lt \frac{\pi}{12}+\frac{k\pi}{2}, k\in\mathbb{Z}$

Once again, if we make a drawing of this, you can find every interval that is being used,

So resulting set is:

$S=[0;\frac{\pi}{12}[\bigcup[\frac{\pi}{4};\frac{7\pi}{12}\bigcup[\frac{7\pi}{4};\frac{13\pi}{12}[\bigcup[\frac{5\pi}{4};\frac{19\pi}{12}[\bigcup[\frac{6\pi}{4};2\pi[$

[[2. Trigonometric functions|Previous]]
[[4. Trigonometric transformations|Next]]
