
Let's consider the following example:

$$sin^{2}(x)+2cos(x)-2=0$$

We don't have a way to solve this using out previous tricks, so we'll do the following:

$$
*z=sin(x)
$$

\* here means we're saying or defining that, in this instance, z is replacing sin(x)

$$
z^{2}+2(\pm \sqrt{1-z^{2}})-2=0
$$

This can be solved, but you'd end up with a large mess of a function, which nobody wants to deal with.

So, we'll try $*z=cos(x)$ instead.

$$
\begin{align}
1-z+2z-2=0\\
z^{2}-2z+1=0\\
(z-1)^{2}=0\\
z=1\\
cos(x)=1\\
x=2\pi k, k\in\mathbb{z}
\end{align}
$$

Also, we know that cos(-x) = cos(x), if we replace x with -x in the equation, we obtain:

$$
\begin{align}
\iff sin^{2}(-x)+2cos(-x)-2=0\\
\iff (-sin(x))^{2}+2cos(x)-2=0\\
\iff sin^{2}(-x)+2cos(-x)-2=0
\end{align}
$$

Well, this means that this equation is invariant when we replace x with -x.
Neat.

This also brings us to the tests of Bioche

## Tests of Bioche

first of all, if the equation with -x turns back into the original equation, replace cos(x) with z, sin(x) = $\sqrt{1-z^2}$ and $tan(x)=\frac{\sqrt{1-z^{2}}}{2}$ as well as $x\ne \frac{\pi}{2}+2k$

Example: solve $3tan^{2}(x)+5=\frac{7}{cos(x)}$

if we replace with -x:

$$ 
\begin{align}
3\frac{sin^{2}-x}{cos^{2}(-x)}+5 \frac{7}{cos(-x )}=0\\
3\frac{sin^{2}x}{cos^{2}(x)}+5- \frac{7}{cos(x)}=0\\
\end{align}
$$

which i the same as the original.

This means: z=cos(x)

$$
\begin{align}
3tan^{2}(x)+5- \frac{7}{cos(x)}=0\\
3 \frac{1-z^{2}}{z^{2}}+5 -\frac{7}{z}=0\\
3(1-z^{2})+5z^{2}-7z=0\\
3+2z^{2}-7z=0\\
(2z-1)(z-3)=0\\
z= \frac{1}{2}\text{ or }3\\
cos(x)= \frac{1}{2} \text{ or } 3 \text{(3 has no solutions)}\\
x= \begin{cases} \frac{\pi}{3}+2\pi k, x\in\mathbb{Z} \\
 \\ \\
-\frac{\pi}{3}+2\pi k, k \in \mathbb{Z}
\end{cases}
\end{align}
$$



The second test is if the function changes if you swap x with $\pi- x$, we set z = sin(x), and cos(x) = $\sqrt{1-z^{2}}$

Example:

Solve $sin(2x)+cos(x)-3tan(x)=0$

$D_{def}=\mathbb{R}\backslash \{\frac{\pi}{2}+k\pi|k\in\mathbb{Z}\}$

$$
\begin{align}
\text{start with replacing}\\
sin(2(\pi-x))+cos(\pi-x)-3 \frac{sin(\pi-x)}{cos(\pi-x)}=0\\
sin(-2x)-cos(x)-3 \frac{sin(x)}{-cos(x)}\\
-sin(2x)-cos(x)+3tan(x)=0\\
sin(2x)+cos(x)-3tan(x)=0\\
\text{this means this works}\\
sin(2x)+cos(x)-3tan(x)=0\\
2z\sqrt{1-z^{2}}+\sqrt{1-z^{2}}-3 \frac{z}{\sqrt{1-z^{2}}}=0\\
2z)(1-z^{2})+1-z^{2}-3z=0\\
-z-2z^{3}+1-z^{2}=0\\
-P(z)=0\\
P(z)=2z^{3}+z^{2}+z-1\\
P(0)=-1,P(1)=3\\
P(\frac{1}{2})= 2\frac{1}{8}+ \frac{1}{4}+ \frac{1}{2}-1=0
\end{align}
$$

From there you have a bunch more steps, notably here you do an euclidean division, and to find that P(z) is $2(z \frac{1}{2})(z^{2}+z+1)$

This means z = 1/2, and sin(x)= 1/2, meaning x is either pi over 6 +2$\pi$k, or 5$\pi$ over 6, plus 2$\pi$k. 
And from there you just write this as a set.

3rd test is if it doesn't change when you switch x with $\pi+x$.
This gives us that we should say: z = tan(x), and $x\ne \frac{\pi}{2}+2\pi k$. The second part means we need to not have x equal to any variation of pi over 2.


Example:

$D_{def}=R\backslash\{\pi k |k\in\mathbb{Z}\}$

$$
\begin{align}
cot(x)+2sin^{2}(x)-2=0\\
cot(\pi+x)+2sin^{2}(\pi+x)\\
cot(x)+2sin^{2}(x)-2=0\\
\text{3rd test works}\\
\\
\text{check if pi/2+k pi works}\\
cot(\frac{pi}{2}+k\pi)+2sin^{2}(\frac{\pi}{2}+k\pi)-2=0\\
0 + 2*1 -2=0\\
\text{gives us our first set of answers with the z thing}\\
cot(x)+sin^{2}(x)-2=0\\
\frac{1}{z}+s\frac{z^{2}}{1+z^{2}}-2=0\\
1+z^{2}+2z^{3}-2z(1+z^{2})=0\\
z^{2}-2z+1=0\\
(z-1)^{2}=0\\
x=1\\
tan(x)=1\\
x=\frac{\pi}{4}+k\pi, k\in\mathbb{z}
\end{align}
$$

Which gives us a set of answers that combines both definitions we've found. I believe in you finding it yourself, as it's not difficult, and I can't be bothered writing it down cause it's easy to figure out.

Test no4, in case nothing works, that leaves you only with the option to replace:

$z=tan(\frac{x}{2}),x\ne \pi+2\pi k$

However, x has no reason to not be $\pi+2\pi k$, so we should just check if it works before applying this.

You'll also need to define:

$$
\begin{matrix} sin(x)=\cfrac{2z}{1+z^{2}} & cos(x)=\cfrac{1-z^{2}}{1+z^{2}} \\ tan(x)= \cfrac{2z}{1-z^{2}}&for x\ne \pi+2\pi k \end{matrix}
$$

So, to solve something like $5cos(x)-6tan(x)=5$, we want to use substitution by $tan\frac{x}{2}$

If we check, we'll find out that $x=\pi+2\pi k$ isn't a solution.

So, we substitute:

$$
\begin{align}
*z=tan(\frac{x}{2})\\
5 \frac{1-z^{2}}{1+z^{2}}-6 \frac{2z}{1-z^{2}}-5=0\\
5(1-z^{2})^{2}-12z(1+z^{2})-5((1+z^{2}+1)(z^{2}))=0\\
5-10z^{2}+5zz^{4}-12z-12z^{3}-5z^{4}=0\\
10z^{4}-12z^{3}-10z^{2}-12z =0\\
2z(5z^{3}-6z^{2}-5z-6)=0
\end{align}
$$

From this we know z=0 is a solution, but we might have up to 4 solutions in the second part, in the parentheses, so we need to analyse this.

For this, we can fairly quickly find that z=2 is a root, just by trial and error. Talk about scuffed...
This means that we can use euclidean division by (z-2) to turn it into a (z-2)\*Q(z) function, the Q being a regular binomial, which you can just solve, using either Viete or something.

Here, you'll find 2 is the only root, as $\Delta$ is negative. 

This tells us that $2zP(z)=0\iff z = 0\text{ or }z = 2$

2 isn't a remarkable value of tan, so we will just define that there's some angle $\phi$ that satisfies $tan(\phi)=2$.

This allows us to find the solution to be: $S=\{2\pi k, 2\phi+2\pi k|k\in\mathbb{Z}\}\in D_{def}$

[[5. Linear equations|Previous]]
