
For no particular reason, when working with triangles we tend to use degrees instead of radians.
The sum of all (3) angles in a triangle is 180 degrees.
That means if you find an angle of more than 90 degrees, it's the greatest in the triangle.

>[!note]+
>For any $x\in]-1;1[$, sin($\alpha$)=x has two solutions in $]0:180[$. One of the solutions is always obtuse, and the other always acute.  

## Cosine theorem

Invented by [Jamshid al-Kashi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jamshid_al-Kashi), it's a theorem that generalizes the Pythagorean theorem for any triangle.

It works in a mildly interesting way that I really can't do justice to, but it allows us to define that for any triangle, with sides of length a,b,c, and angles opposite to these sides respectively being $\alpha, \beta, \gamma$.

From the theorem, we know:

$a^{2}= b^{2}+c^{2}+2bc\cos(\alpha)$
$b^{2}=a^{2}+c^{2}+2ac\cos(\beta)$
$c^{2}=a^{2}+b^{2}+2ab\cos(\gamma)$

It's proven by using a triangle's height, which splits the triangle into two right triangles, and working from there.

## Sine theorem

It's summarized as:
$$
\frac{a}{\sin(\alpha)}=\frac{b}{\sin(\beta)}=\frac{c}{\sin(\gamma)}
$$
It's very neat, an it's proof is that:

$h = b\sin(\alpha)$ and $h= a\sin(\beta)$, and a similar thing can be found for $a\sin(\gamma)$ and $c\sin(\alpha)$ as well as $b\sin(\gamma)$ and $c\sin(\beta)$, which allows use them all together, as it establishes a nice rapport.

## Example

We have a simple triangle with side lengths of 91, 65, and 39. Find their angles.

Given we know a lot about the sides, let's use the law of cosines:


$$\begin{split}a^{2}=b^{2}+c^{2}-2bc\cos(\alpha)\\
\iff \cos(\alpha) = \frac{b^{2}+c^{2}-a^{2}}{2bc}\\
= \frac{65^{2}+39^{2}-91^{2}}{2*65*39}\\
=\frac{-1}{2}\\
\iff \alpha=120^{\circ}
\end{split}$$

To find the second angle, you can go for either law really, so let's use the sines one:

$$
\begin{split}
\frac{a}{\sin\alpha}=\frac{b}{\sin\beta}\iff\sin(\beta)=\frac{b\sin\alpha}{a}\\
\iff sin(\beta)=\frac{65}{91} \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}
\end{split}
$$
This gives us two answers, but as one of the anlges is obtuse, the others must be smaller than 90 degrees, so $38.2^{\circ}$.
This allows us to find $\gamma$, as it's simply $\gamma=180-\alpha-\beta=21.8$

## Heron's formula

Say our goal is to find the area of a triangle, knowing only the length of it's sides

$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
S &= \frac{1}{2}ch\\
&=\frac{1}{2}bc\sin(\alpha)\\
&=\frac{1}{2}bc\sqrt{1-\cos^{2}(x)}\\
&=\frac{1}{2}bc\sqrt{(1-\cos(x))(1+\cos(x))}
\\
\text{Using the cosine theorem} \\
\cos(\alpha)=\frac{b^{2}+c^{2}-a^{2}}{2bc}\\
\\
&\iff {(1-\cos(x))(1+\cos(x))} \\
&=(1-\frac{b^{2}+c^{2}-a^{2}}{2bc})(1+\frac{b^{2}+c^{2}-a^{2}}{2bc})\\
&=(\frac{2bc-b^{2}+a^{2}}{2bc})(\frac{2bc+b^{2}+c^{2}-a^{2}}{2bc})\\
&=\frac{a^{2}-(b-c)^{2}}{2bc} \frac{(b+c)^{2}-a^{2}}{2bc}\\
&= \frac{(a-(b-c))(a+(b-c))}{2bc} \frac{((b+c)-a)(b+c)+a)}{2bc}\\
\text{ If we take p to be } \frac{a+b+c}{2} \text{ we get}\\
&= \frac{2^{2}(p-a)(p-b)(p-c)p}{bc^{2}}\\
(*S)&=\frac{1}{2}bc\sqrt{\frac{2^{2}(p-a)(p-b)(p-c)p}{bc^{2}}}\\
&=\sqrt{(p-a)(p-b)(p-c)p}
\end{split}
\end{equation}
$$

Which is Heron's formula.

We can also add a bit to the law of sines through this:

$$\frac{a}{\sin(\alpha)}=\frac{b}{\sin(\beta)}=\frac{c}{\sin(\gamma)}=\frac{2S}{abc}$$

## Inscribed and circumscribed circles

And now, for something completely different. 

Say we have a triangle ABC, a random triangle.
Say O is the point of intersection of the bisections of all the triangle's sides.

The circumscribed circle will be the circle with center O passing through every vertex of the triangle.

Knowing it, we get access to some more info:

Using that and the theorem of the center angle, we can find the following infos:

$\sin(\alpha)=\frac{\frac{a}{2}}{R}=\frac{a}{2R}\iff 2R = \frac{a}{\sin(\alpha)}=\frac{b}{\sin(\beta)}=\frac{c}{\sin(\gamma)}$

Which means $R = \frac{abc}{4S}$


Say ABC is yet another random triangle.
Say O is the intersection of it's vertices' bisections.
The circle of center O tangent to every side will be the inscribed circle.

Using some more stuff, we can come up with:
$S=area(ABC)=area(AOB)+area(BOC)+area(COA)$
The area of each can be calculated using height and the base, and the height happens to be the radius on the inscribed circle.
That is to say:
$S=\frac{cr}{2}+ \frac{ra}{2}+ \frac{rb}{2}$
$= r(\frac{a+b+c}{2})=r\times p$

This also allows us to find the radius, which is:

$r=S/p=\frac{\sqrt{(p-a)(p-b)(p-c)p}}{p}$
and therefore $r=\sqrt{\frac{(p-a)(p-b)(p-c)}{p}}$
