

## Generalities

Say we have a function f, defined on the open interval I, and say there's $x_{0}\in I$

If the limit $\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{f(x)-f(x_{0})}{x-x_{0}}$ exists, then f is differentiable at $x_{0}$. In that case, we note $f'(x_{0})=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{f(x)-f(x_{0})}{x-x_{0}}$.

The derived number is the slope of the line tangent to f, at point ($x_{0}, f(x_{0})$).

The equation of the tangent is obtained using $t: y=f'(x_{0})(x-x_{0})+f_{x_{0}}$.

Lastly, we can use $f'$ as a function in of itself, with as value $f':x\to \lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{f(x)-f(x)}{x-x_{0}}$, which while an abuse of mathematical notation, is very useful.


## Derived numbers of periodic, even, and odd functions

If we have a function that's periodic with period T > 0, it's derivative will also be periodic, with period T.

Specifically, because:

$$
f'(x_{0}+T)=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{f(x)-f(x+T)}{x-(x_{0}+T)}=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{f(x+T)-f(x+T)}{(x+T)-(x_{0}+T)}=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{f(x)-f(x)}{x-x_{0}}=f'
$$


Next, if we have f, defined on the open **and symmetrical in relation to the origin** interval I.

If f is even, i becomes odd.

$$
f'(x)=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{f(x)-f(x_{0})}{x-x_{0}}=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{f(-\tilde{x})-f(-x_{0})}{-x+x_{0}}=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{f(\tilde{x})-f(x_{0})}{x_{0}-\tilde{x}}=-f'(x_{0})
$$

However, if it's odd, it becomes even:

$$
f'(x)=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{f(x)-f(x_{0})}{x-x_{0}}=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{-f(-\tilde{x})-f(x_{0})}{-x+x_{0}}=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{f(\tilde{x})-f(x_{0})}{\tilde{x}-x_{0}}=f'(x_{0})
$$


## Derivatives of the trigonometric functions

1. $\forall x_{0}\in\mathbb{R}, \sin'(x_{0})=\cos(x_{0})$

The proof of that is:

$$
\begin{split}
\sin'(x_{0})=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{\sin(x)-\sin(x_{0})}{x-x_{0}}\\
=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{2\sin(\frac{x-x_{0}}{2})\cos(\frac{x+x_{0}}{2})}{x-x_{0}}\\
=\lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{\sin(\frac{x-x_{0}}{2})}{\frac{x-x_{0}}{2}}\cos(\frac{x+x_{0}}{2})
\end{split}
$$

From there, we know that the limit of the sine part is 1, and the limit of the cosine part is cosine of x0.

An example would be:

$$
\begin{split}
(\sin^{2}(x))'= \lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{\sin^{2}(x)-\sin^{2}}{x} \\
= \lim_{x\to x_{0}} \frac{\sin(x)-\sin(x_{0})}{x-x_{0}}(\sin(x)+\sin(x_{0}))\\
= 2\sin(x_{0})\cos(x_{0})
\end{split}
$$

2. $\forall x_{0}\in\mathbb{R}, \cos'(x_{0})=-\sin(x)$

Proof is in the series of exercises.

3. $\forall x_{0}\in D_{tan}, \tan'=1+tan^{2}(x_{0})= \frac{1}{\cos^{2}(x_{0})}$

Proof is fairly simple, just turn it into $\tan(x-x_{0})$, and solve from there.


## Derivatives of reciprocal trigonometric functions

Let I be an open interval. Let $f: I\to F(I)$ so that:
- f is derivable on I
- f is bijective
- $f\(x_{0})\ne0,\forall x_{0}\in I$

Then we can show that $f':F(I)\to(I)$ is derivable on $f(I)$ an that $\forall y_{0}\in I$:
$(f^{-1})'(y_{0})= \frac{1}{f'(f^{-1}(y_{0}))}$

You can also find that using limits, but it feels like a scam. There's docs on the topicon the moodle.

Some additional notes include, that for this to actually work, we need:
- $f(I)$ open
- $f^{-1}$ continuous


### Arcsine

$$\arcsin'= \frac{1}{\sqrt{1-y_{0}^{2}}}$$

Proving it using the previous setup is easy:

$$
\begin{split}
\arcsin'(y_{0})= \frac{1}{\sin'(\arcsin(y_{0}))}\\
= \frac{1}{\cos(\arcsin(y_{0}))}\\
= \frac{1}{\sqrt{1-y_{0}}}
\end{split}
$$

### Arccosine

$$\arccos'= \frac{-1}{\sqrt{1-y_{0}^{2}}}$$

The proof is similar, and incidentally an exercise


### Arctan

$$\arctan'(y_{0})= \frac{1}{1+y_{0}^{2}}$$

### Arccot

$$arccot'(y_{0})=\frac{-1}{1+y_{0}^{2}}$$


## Additionally

Say $f: I\to f(I)$, with $f(I)$ being an open interval.

Then, if f is constant, $f'(x_{0})=0, ~\forall x_{0}\in I$

Reciprocally, if f is derivable, on I, and f' of any x in I is 0, then f is also constant.

[[8. Reciprocal trigonometric function|Previous]]