
> Well, apparently we're doing combinatorics now.
> - *me, 10 minutes late because  of SBB*

Let's start with the Cartesian product:

Say we have sets $E=\set{\alpha,\beta,\gamma}$ and $F=\set{1,2}$

We define $E\times F$ to be $E\times F=\set{(x, y)\mid x \in E \text{ and } y\in F}$

Because of that it's $\set{(\alpha,1),(\beta,1),(\gamma,1),(\alpha,2),(\beta,2),(\gamma,2)}$.

To define it using sets, we need the idea of powersets:

$\mathcal{P}(F)=\set{\emptyset, \set{1}, \set{2}, \set{1,2}}$

A powerset is the set of all subsets of a set.

We can also say the following:

$E=F=\mathbb{R}$

What is $E\times F$ ?

Well, it's a set of combinations of any two real numbers, which we define as $\mathbb{R}^2$, or an infinite 2D plane.

And what is $\mathcal{P}(R)$? Well, it's a set of pretty much any sets of numbers you can think of (excluding irrationals), so it's going to include $\mathbb{R}$, but also $\set{\sqrt{2}}$, and $\mathbb{N, Z, Q}$ etc...

## Powersets of finite sets

So, for a finite set, or specifically it's powerset, how many subsets does it have? Well, it's going to be $\text{card }(E)$, it other terms it's it's **cardinality**.

However, if we want to find it's subsets of a specific length, it gets complex.

To do so, we need two things: binomials and pascal's triangle.

We do it as follows:

First we define the for these binomials $\binom{n}{k}=\text{card}\set{A\subset E\mid \text{card}A = k}$.


Then, we assign that to pascal's triangle,  defining that going down increases n, and going sideways increases k. 

That way, if we need the amount of a set of length n's subsets of length k, we need to go n down and k sideways in the triangle to find the number.

So, using pascal's triangle, we can find all of that easily, but say you don't have that triangle available, how do you find it, using a formula?

Well, it uses factorials, so a multiplication of all positive natural numbers greater than 0 until the number we're at. This makes it difficult to use with higher values, but makes it neat if you have a computer and some free time to let it run.

The definition is as follows:

$$
\binom{n}{k}=\frac{n!}{k!(n-k)!}=nCk
$$

So, let's say $\binom{4}{2}$, or how many subsets of 2 does a set of 4 have? Well, using our formula, we get $\frac{24}{2(4-2)}=\frac{24}{4}=6$, which is correct (if we say the subsets of length 2 from $\set{1,2,3,4}$, it'll be $\set{1,2}, \set{1,3},\set{1,4}, \set{2,3}, \set{2,4}, and \set{3,4}$). 


How does it work? Poorly. [The wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binomial_coefficient) explains it better.

Basically, n! finds every way to arrange n objects, and k! makes it so only the first n-k objects are arranged, and (n-k) removes repetitions. How does it work? Fuck if I know, there's probably a 3blue1brown video on the topic.


Anyhow, back to the triangle.

If we look at the triangle, we'll notice some useful properties:

1. k = 1 or k = n, it'll result in $\binom{n}{k}=1$
2. $\binom{n}{k}=\binom{n}{n-k}$
3. A number in the triangle, is the sum of the 2 numbers above it.
4. If we take the sum of the coefficients on one line, it'll result in the powers of two. ($2^n$)

Now, how do we prove these properties?

1 is trivial, the bounds of the triangle are all 1.

2 When we find a subset, we inadvertently find it's the complementary set, and that allows for this.

3 This works because of the how the triangle is defined, but it's property is more fun:

$$
\binom{n}{k}=\binom{n-1}{k}+\binom{n-1}{k-1}
$$

4 also happens because of the definition of the triangle, so property:

$\displaystyle\sum_{k=0}^n\binom{n}{k}=n^n$

This works as a result of the previous thingy:

$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
\binom{n-1}{k}+\binom{n-1}{k-1} &= \frac{(n-1)!}{k!(n-1-k)!} + \frac{(n-1)!}{(k-1)!(n-k)!} \\
&= \frac{(n-1)!}{(k-1)!(n-k)!} \left( \frac{1}{k} + 1 \right) \\
&= \frac{(n-1)!}{(k-1)!(n-k)!} \cdot \frac{1 + k}{k} \\
&= \frac{(n-1)!}{(k-1)!(n-k)!} \cdot \frac{k+1}{k} \\
&= \frac{n!}{k!(n-k)!} \\
&= \binom{n}{k}
\end{split}
\end{equation}
$$

In any case, all this allows us to do sums instead of multiplication. Aand back to first grade it is then. 

Anyhow, here are some uses for this:

So, let's have an x, y $\in \mathbb{R}$ and n $\in\mathbb{N}$. We have

$$
(x+y)^n=\sum_{k=0}^n\binom{n}{k}x^k*y^{n-k}
$$

Newton invented this, as he did with like 90% of what Euler didn't. Showoff. 

Basically, this allows us to find somewhat easily to find what is the 'full' version of a binomial.

Another thing this gives us is the fast solution to $\binom{n}{2}=\frac{n(n-1)}{2}$. It's useful in combinatorics.

